
 A backward look is fraught with danger;
 A ball: the joy of every guest!
 And from the nearby Army station
 And now there's gradually beginning
 Ahead of them a pinewood slumbers
 At feasts, though, full of pert aggression,
 At first Onegin's tongue produced
 as at a censure that was hard.
 And if she happened anywhere
 And now, monotonously dashing
 And what's more, they're so supercilious,
 Ah, gently, gently, easy goes --
 As if before some mournful parting
 All are dumbfounded. Lensky shies
 All sleep: from the saloon a roaring
 A new acquaintance claims our quill.
 an album's loose and floating sheaves.
 an ace a dozen yards away;
 amazement: ``Where's your second gone?''
 Already, in exultant fashion,
 amateur of caprice and quirk.
 at a friend's word, a girl's caress.
 as all things did, to bore him; homing,
 alarmed by my melodious lay,
 Alas, it's not so hard to guess!
 And every morning I awake
 And he was loved... at least he never
 And now, my friends, I hear from you
 As far removed as they were able
 All flourishing; they send their duty.
 ``All right, I'll come then...'' ``What a friend!''
 All right, you want the resurrection
 away from trusting his own eyes.
 again I see your soulful flight?
 against each other swift, small feet.
 against the tea's excessive sweetness,
 away, so cool, so unconcerned?
 apartment where a double glaze
 awaits him - hears nobody coming.
 (an attribute that's quite vexatious,
 (alas, too salted); now they're bringing
 am always glad to write, it's true,
 at any hour escape his cell.''
 at any other sort of book.
 at any time he'd be prepared.
 a blank default would suit me better.
 a blessing from its blasts and rages,
 a ball here, there a children's party;
 a ball in Petersburg; but fun
 album and stays, Princess Alina,
 as bonneted Academician
 a brook flows through a grove of lime.
 8 August Lafontaine (1758-1851), German novelist of family life.
 a block of snow will slip and tumble.
 a bit provincial and affected,
 ancestral1 portraits met the view
 accounts, shaved forelocks,4 Sunday bath;
 accounts were done, a winter outing
 and all into the salon squeeze,
 and all their ravishing invention
 and arm in arm they all go through;
 and, as observer, to be present
 and, as the years went by, who duly
 and act the humble or imperious,
 and, any moment, down he'll slip.
 and beat a nacreous wing when caught
 and brains, and an attractive face.
 And while with all despatch he's dressing
 a crayfish rides on spider-back;
 arch-commentator of the dream.
 a carving-knife - and in the tangle
 and almost swoons, and almost dies.
 and autumn lingered, long and slow;
 and always the inspired regard --
 At last he wakes, and stirs in bed,
 a book of household calculations,
 a classicist, he'll not allow
 a dwarf with tail, and a half-strain,
 and as in some appalling dream
 and all our fresh imagination,
 and after jealousy's grim weather
 At last, with dawn upon him, stooping
 ambassador?'' In some surprise
 as by the shortest way they flew,
 as battles go, I've not begun;
 a cheerful glimmer on the snow
 Another page of recollection:
 a calculation past despising --
 arch-rake, pothouse tribune-persona,
 a corpse on boards was all he found,
 a country house - and one who still
 at Cleopatra, hiss her off,
 and ananas, the gold of trees.
 a deathless murmur from within,
 and an insouciant lorgnette.
 and all is lost beyond retrieving;
 and all our modish education;
 and all the neighbours planned a match
 and all the world is buried deep.
 and all the works of Fontanelle16 --
 and all this flashy masquerading,
 and also prettier, I'll be bound,
 and at the altar, with a crown,
 and at the very self-same time
 and although Troy's greybeards, collected
 and always the self-same objection;
 and brandishes her tinsel splendour
 and bedbug that infest the stages
 and been as happy... as I could!
 and blesses the unrivalled brand
 and band already tired of blowing,
 and blood had bubbled as it flowed;
 and coachmen swear, and women squeal.
 and charming reverie's vain deflection
 and clasps her neck; and now she sees
 and cheers salute him. Tanya must
 and crisply crunch the morning snow.
 audacious tunnels will be marching:
 And now the two opponents doff
 and captive girls, by Salgir20 lying.
 and cattle roamed the plain, and here
 and dead ideas from that old hoard,
 and duck get up; with instant timing,
 Arrived apace, he gives the word
 and breeding ducks and geese as well,
 and bred upon the Neva's brink,
 and bliss for him is when he hotly
 and bending deeply down to greet her
 and by Repentance. All this lends,
 and by the sound of silly joys.
 and cared not what his daughter kept
 and, curious now about the lot,
 and counsellor (retired) Fly&aacute;nov,
 and country stillness: there the lyre
 and dinner with a touch of idle
 as did the general at her side.
 and dutifully shared his life
 and Dunya works the samovar;
 and doctors, he'd have died in bed.
 and dreamt that she with him one day
 and daily scenes of modish life
 and exclamations, and good cheer.
 and even honourable man:
 and evening now drew on in mist...
 and every day its own enjoyment?
 and everything around was dreaming,
 and everything is cramped and loud;
 and every man won't understand it
 and every night shares her repose.
 and every plea that lips can treat;
 a dream's mute monument, reflection
 and empty gossip, you'll allow,
 addressed to Onegin''... ...'Well, that's easy.
 addressed to Tanya, certain verses
 and ease his catch with all due care.
 and eatables beyond all classing
 and entice a fellow in
 and entered. Ballroom overflowing...
 and enviable for a poet,
 and frames would shudder, windows tremble;
 and feather-beds, and birds in cages,
 a deft arrangement to his hair,
 and Fly&aacute;nov, amply lubricated,
 a different mask? is he becoming
 and feel once more emotion's ban.
 and faithful wife I'd have been cast.
 and friend Evgeny. The princess
 and friends and friendship, soul-destroying;
 and felt himself love's invalide.
 and finally be turned to rock
 and finds the world a darkling show?
 and from her eyes the eager tears
 and flown like arrows from a bow.
 and from the salon the princess,
 and from within come noise and cheer;
 and for a chuckle or a smile.
 and for belle Nina, as it read,
 and force that purity inspires,
 and for her cheeks to cease their blushing;
 and festal evenings in the gloom.
 and fastens, like a term of art,
 and fatherland and grim confinement?
 and found her dreams, her secret fire,
 and glad he was he'd thus arranged
 and granite, were so far apart.
 and glittering whiteness all around.
 and gallops. Pistols made for pairing
 and good and bad are all mixed up. &gt;
 and good and ill, and learning's fruit,
 and growing thicker; then, heart-shaking,
 and good old sun more seldom glowing;
 and Grandison beyond compare,
 and glumly serves the medicine bottle,
 and give her comfort to the end:
 and gave our heroine enjoyment
 a dog with horns, a goatee'd witch,
 and heartless pleasure was up-graded;
 and health, life's sweetness and its shimmer,
 and heart so tender, it can still
 and he believed his friends were ready
 and hid the bookshelf's dusty stack
 and held him briefly in their sway,
 and hills that delicately winter
 and home he drives, deep-sunk in thought.
 and he pursuing, till at length
 and happy licence are allowed,
 and has no knowledge of deceit?
 And Eugene? half-awake, half-drowsing,
 and human words, and horse's stamp!
 and, hands a-tremble, Nyanya prayed
 and hope and passion; life had glowed
 and hetman of the gambling-halls,
 All Lensky's thoughts went hurly-burly,
 Already borne down by regret,
 and hate with malice; he whose life
 ``A humble sinner, Dimitry Larin,
 and how a country lives, and why
 and in full brilliance shines the ball.
 and I surrender to my fate.''
 and in her grief seemed fit to die;
 and in her unconsidered note
 and in his look there shows somehow
 and in my soul, o spring, how madly
 and in retreat from all enjoyment
 and it's the foreign phrase that trips
 and, in the district, this persona
 and in the role of virtuous mother
 and, in the yard, stand eighteen jades.
 and jokes and spiteful gossip ran
 and jam in jars, and household wares,
 and just a double charge of shot
 and kept quite silent while she read.
 and kisses smack as young girls greet;
 and leave no faint footprint of glory...
 and leant upon the granite shelf;
 and locked him in a dark recess.
 and logic; yet the conversation
 and like an arrow from a bow
 and Lensky follows her... Eugene,
 and looked at him without a word,
 and looked for Lensky, while the labour
 and look, my cousin's come, Buy&aacute;nov,
 and looks out on the darkened plain.
 and look serenely on your beauty!...
 and lovelorn maiden whom he'd known,
 and lives, a veritable sage,
 and magic nights. In headlong course
 and Malek Adel,4 de Linar,5
 and melancholy as Svetlana,2
 a dumb moon, on a dumb horizon.''
 and manners of an earlier time.
 and nameless rivulet, that scene
 and no one's ear could take offence
 and nothing pierced his senses' blur.
 and not without a sigh, perforce
 and now at last he saw the World.
 and now the crunchy snow is stripping
 and once again received a crown.
 and once forbidden fruit is seen,
 am doomed to perish, yet to die
 and offer to that ash a sigh;
 and on her lips a light smile plays.
 and obstinate his look. But she
 and on the crumpled sofa too
 and paler than the moon at dawn,
 and parted from her by their star.
 and Paris too. But hear my pleading:
 and put his glasses on to see
 and put them on a paced-out site.
 and rightly so, but now his pain
 At first, disparity of heart
 and on the flames let fall unseen
 and on their captivating trail
 and put a cross-sign on the maid.
 and put our heart into a shiver
 and read the books there on her own.
 and radiate a rainbow: blazing
 and rest his dear bones in the tomb,
 and raven curls of shoulder-length.
 and swarming in his inmost soul.
 And so they lived, two ageing mortals,
 and swaggers in a red calpack;
 and so, before the world of learning,
 And home was now their destination;
 And not because she'd read him, either,
 And our young poet - Olga fired him
 and she, submissively, inertly --
 Away inside that unassuming
 And someone's heart will feel a quiver,
 Ah, he had loved a love that never
 and sees... whatever do you think?
 and still exempted from removal
 and, still transparent to the view,
 and some were even testifying
 and sang me to the altar-mat.
 and sink to prose's humble level:
 and shout, and make room for the pair.
 and soon they bring her... a guitar
 Alas! the generations must,
 and shouts suggest a crowded wake;
 and, scroll in hand, before her eyes
 and strip the forest round about.
 and sat down by the window-sill.''
 and sets her gently on the floor.
 and sat there as the minutes crept;
 and says: ``Farewell, you vales and fountains!
 As, lovingly, in his confession,
 and he was bored with social noise;
 and how's Tatyana? Olga too,
 and I be by the world forgot;
 and in a corner make him choke
 and I'll be thirty in a trice?
 and in a singsong voice confide
 and it deceived us in return;
 and in flat calm I've found the stuff
 and I'll be true to him, for life.''
 and, in her hand, a small French book.
 and in it boldly I'm confiding''...
 and iron bridges will go arching
 and in the bath-house had a table
 and in the country, blissful, horned,
 and in the eyes of the judicious
 and in the morning wouldn't know
 and in the misted condensation
 and introduced, for the last lap,
 and jolly magpies on the flit,
 As soon as he appears, discussion
 and junior Ensign in the Guards.
 and Lensky, left eye closing, aimed --
 ``At the Larins'!'' ``But how mysterious.
 and life celestial's phantom gleams,
 and listen for the heart's first sound,
 and little dancing whirls of snow
 and mileposts grip the idle sense
 and more than once the German baker,
 and my whole life has been directed
 ``Akulka'' the onetime Selina,
 and neighbours, followed the same ends.
 and no one in the room so proudly
 and not a mention of my name...''
 and not because she'd once preferred
 and nothing in her look is altered:
 and never played a shrewder trick.
 and never stir a foot away!
 and now a swooning mind attends me,
 and now it's Bordeaux the Judicious
 and opened Schiller... but the embrace
 and on her cheeks the fever stays,
 and other, more exacting worries,
 and, on my bed-head gently leaning,
 and, on the crosses, jackdaw hosts.
 and on their marks has made them stand;
 and p&acirc;t&eacute;, Strasbourg's deathless glory,
 and plaits a piebald shoe of bast;
 and pledged to you, and firmly planned:
 and pale, and fade without a word!
 and prone to censure in our thought;
 and portents of the lunar phase.
 and part in kindness? Just the same,
 and parts the fringes of his curtain;
 and plunged in tender shame's confusion,
 and pay my debt in the same coin
 and read my Apuleius keenly,
 and riches, and the wish to thank
 and racking with their strain and stress
 and redcurrants throw at him.
 and ruled him like an autocrat --
 and ran far off... the Muse came too.
 and rest myself from earlier days.
 and roused the village long ago:
 and stately periwigs, their fame.
 and sideways her poor head is stooping.
 and sleeping sounder than a rock.
 and sighs, and asks oneself all through:
 and so he lacks the strength to mention
 and still within, behind the veil
 and skids and tumbles down; the cheerful
 and so in the salons could make
 and so in winter-fields will shiver
 and silently he hung his head.
 and self-oblivion was his art!
 and stoves with tiles of various hue.
 and soon his travels had begun,
 and slowly day begins to climb.
 and should have played a different part:
 and scorned his fellows through and through,
 and soon, oh soon the storm's arrears
 and stops his doleful heart from sleeping:
 and soon will day's bright tune be played;
 and so the harmless chat progresses
 and set off prompter than a whistle
 and set on hating the coquette,
 and satisfied with what he'd got,
 and saved from being charmed or fooled!
 and so your faithfullest supporter
 and that embittered mind which boils
 and teaching children how to spell.
 and trails alone around the wood.''
 and trains a mirror till it faces
 and tears were drowning her regard.
 and than these letters, and these tears.
 and then a boat, with oars a-swinging,
 and then a drozhky's clopping sound
 and then a stroll in Letny Park.
 and then concludes: she loves him yet!
 and the churchyard where, new-erected,
 and the derivative Knyazhn&iacute;n:8
 and there, beneath your noonday sky,
 and then, indoors the livelong day,
 and then it's tea that comes to mention,
 and then old cousin Pelag&eacute;ya
 and then, with an enchanting grace,
 and the young city-bred newcomer,
 and take due warning from my speech.
 and taken by the French - some prize! --
 and telling trochee from iambic
 and took a mortgage on his land.
 and those we sing for will be paid
 and though he liked a fiery quarrel --
 And here my sentiments impel me
 and tea's brought in. Instead of chimes
 At first they called; but on perceiving
 15 A mocking reference to Mikhail Muraviev's poem ``To the Goddess of the Neva.''
 Alone amid all his possessions,
 Already Olga's hand was gripping
 and tea and supper; there's an inner
 Agree, the way Eugene proceeded
 9 Actress in tragedy.
 A thinker in a desert mission,
 and tedious means to festive ends.
 and the blancmanger, then a fleet
 and trembles like a hunted fawn.
 and the deep-throated billows' choric
 and there at large he goes patrolling
 and there a tombstone says its word
 and there, love's protestations, binding
 and the majestic, antlered royal,
 and the poet, without a sound,
 And of the cupboards, one contains
 All this has now gone out of fashion,
 A sudden clatter!... blood was curdled...
 and theirs was the poetic flame
 and the Skot&iacute;nins, grizzled sages,
 and then sat silent all the way.
 and tried to write, but a hard session
 and to it, with a grave import,
 and tell of children's plighted playing
 and though my muse may be capricious,
 and though perhaps old fires were thrusting
 and thought, a sleepy numbness steals;
 and though to do so would be daring,
 and thoughts of her were what inspired him
 and thus our race, so fluctuating,
 add vale when he signed a letter;
 and when, by misty moon, the east
 and where is love's tempestuous yearning,
 and where Thalia, gently napping,
 and where Terpsichore alone
 and wrecked the flooring-boards for good;
 and wasted life's fine flower meanwhile.
 And all the while the moon was shining
 and to that far and lonely nook
 and truffles, which have ever been
 and, under, ``toute &agrave; vous Annette'';
 and where the husband, recognizing
 and when its waters were not showing,
 and, when one's least prepared for it
 and whiskers - all of this it keeps
 and whist, that's now so keenly f&ecirc;ted --
 and walk, and breathe, before I tell
 and with a yawn took up his pen,
 ``Another!... No, another never
 and with his dinner, and his wife.
 and Werther, martyred and doom-laden,
 and watch him stubbornly bring low
 and, with it, forced renown to come --
 ``Abandon hope for evermore.''9
 At first I thought it out of season
 A sorry state of things, it's true!
 At this midnight of my condition,
 and took two Petriads in calf,
 and to the vision of those mortal
 and to Tanya, when he was through,
 and underneath her downy pillow
 and useful goods of every kind.
 Always our fervid hero tended
 and up the rustling curtain crawls.
 and volume three of Marmontel.
 and what came out? a hairy, tumbled,
 and ``what's your name?'' she asks him, speaking
 and where had he arrived from, not
 and where he'd silently agreed.
 and where most surely notes are sped.
 and where's her sister now? and where,
 and while the star still flew, she'd hurry
 and whisper ``Dunya, pay attention!''
 A thought was born, and quickly noted...
 and wakened Lensky by exclaiming:
 and warmed the Chinese teapot; flowing
 and wore his dressing-gown to dine.
 and washed its face, to her brought word
 and with a halting, trembling gait
 and with a sigh I now admit
 and watched a different world unroll.
 and watch your daughters closer yet,
 and with its feeble glow outlining
 and, with my Eugene, so have I.
 and with the decorous throng to follow
 and yet a distant admonition
 and yet by Vergil or Racine
 And foes he sees, long-since forgotten,
 and with no post, no work, no wife,
 and yet in her you'd not detect --
 and yet inseparably present,
 and yet in vain ennui I squander
 and yet so light. All that is real
 and yet your honour is my gage
 and your alas-ing and alack-ing
 and your sincerity of thought
 and yawn in silence at the stage
 are almost bursting; she's quite ready,
 are bound, by every virtuous wife,
 are coloured in a single tone,
 aged Derzh&aacute;vin1 saw and blessed us
 are entered here, in friendship's gage,
 an elegy to her address,
 at eighteen years, to some compassion.
 are here untouched by fashion's reign,
 are just as nimble as their feet.
 are old times, and the servants' hall.
 an eloquence of fevered strength,
 at earliest morning out she started,
 are treated to the fullest rigour
 avert his chest from pistol's click,
 ages we'd never heard of love:
 are we recalled to grief still burning
 at feasts, was strong and fancy-free?
 affected pose - and an unspeaking
 as fresh as ever, for its graces
 a foe - our mood should be warm-hearted.
 a free romance's far horizon,
 a frequent question: ``tell me who
 at fifty, would prolong the story
 a friend of yours in his first youth
 a flimsy bridge whose every quake
 a full confession of the heart.
 as files, and scissors straight and curving,
 a flood on which no frosty band
 as from their luscious hive go tumbling
 a fop, a punter on the cards,
 a far-flung traveller who was creaking
 a furious, boiling, heaving main
 at first by Moscow's youthful graces
 at first Madame gave him tuition,
 at first she had no heart to range;
 at first, with God knows whom to see,
 at forty he'd have got the gout,
 as fast as post-horses could go,
 a fisher's fire. Through country gleaming
 a faster, stronger pulsing start.
 a fashion-plate for illustrators,
 as fate's mysterious purpose burrows,
 And then she broods and mopes for good,
 a few books had escaped disgrace:
 a grammar, a digest of fable,
 a grain of gladness; tears' repression
 a grey-haired, perfumed exquisite,
 a great attraction to conversing.
 as gage of all things that were good,
 a grizzled Calmuck stands to meet them,
 a gulf has gaped... Says Tanya: ``I
 a general of majestic bearing
 a group of monsters round a table,
 a glossary of smart argot...
 a girl or two, without a smile
 as gay as morning and as clear,
 at heart by grim remorse's freezing.
 a hybrid cross of cat and crane.
 a hidden beauty in the end:
 a hideous deal of tribulation.
 as he descended to the grave.
 as helpmeet in my sad existence,
 a humble cross, in woodland gloom,
 a hundred times afresh distorted;
 as horses whirled him through the dust.
 a hermit's life - he'd be proceeding
 a house, a village, and a wood
 at hours, which, why I cannot think,
 a haze in me, but I grew used
 am I estranged, does all that cheers,
 as I have... learn from my belief
 as if a cold hand squeezed her heart,
 as it assembles them around;
 (as I've so oft in jest related)?
 as if beneath her, dark and rumbling,
 as infant sleep, or the unaffected
 an idle monk in glum seclusion,
 an inn at each stage of the route.
 as if she'd been profoundly sleeping,
 as if spellbound, Tatyana stands.
 as if some goal had been achieved.
 amidst the howling and the blast
 amid the deadening joys of fashion,
 as I recall a bygone age?
 as instituted long ago.''
 as in the nook he'd sit alone
 a joking flirt, or both together,
 a joker in the old tradition,
 asked Lensky: ``Should we start, I mean?''
 ask Tanya out to dine, and they
 all a pure maiden's love was breathing.
 a liar still, Lyub&oacute;v Petrovna,
 at least by a regretful kindness;
 at least her tone is sometimes found
 all blend into Eugene alone.
 all brought to life at your direction.
 a lady - what a grim discussion! --
 all day, all night, his presence fills her,
 all egoistical and dry,
 a life-creating voice was lost;
 all for our tender dreamy maiden
 all in a blaze, I said: it's he!
 all modish foes dread worldly shame.
 as linen's brought for him to wear.
 at length, midst children swarming round him,
 all of an emptiness so killing - &gt;
 all others with a waistcoat's set
 all point at her, and all combine
 all plunged his soul deep in the stream
 a lyre, and on it perched, a dove --
 all stand. He walks towards the door.
 at last alone, and quite forgetting
 all shout and argue, laugh and squeak.
 all sorts of hopeless appetites;
 a Lancer - how she deified him!
 a Lancer wooed and won her hand,
 at last the final hours arrive.
 all's well; the destined hour at last
 all that today we find absurd.
 all these are charming! but to put
 all this, at eighteen years of age,
 as love's technique, when it would blare
 allows her hand, that's lost all feeling,
 allows no comfort to come through --
 allow no rest to you or me;
 all was material for transcribing:
 as much as in Moscow the proud.
 as much of banquets and the cork
 a madrigal for epitaph.
 a modish second-hand edition,
 a modish taste, a dowdy touch --
 at my famed portrait and will say:
 a mild rebuke was his worst mark,
 a monster of the gens Satanic,
 admires the tumult and the pressing,
 almost as good as a dim lamp.
 a masculine disguise to aid
 a Muscovite in Harold's dress,
 almanacs, journals of reflection,
 a mansion stands just round a turning.
 a marksman crouching in the green.
 a nightingale, in forest gloom,
 at noontime does his horn resound
 a note from Lensky; in between
 a nation's wealth is, what augments it,
 a novel graced with such a name.
 a novel in Lafontaine's8 manner...
 a novel on the established line
 a novel, vague and superficial,
 at once they give a man the spleen.
 an old man saw her as she came,
 alone, and sunk in calculation,
 alone across the fields of space,
 above a stream the moon had lighted.
 an ode in twenty-five cantos.
 above the dust of his remains
 adore the love that comes in dream.
 above the water started tracing
 alone with him; Onegin takes her
 alone, with no adornment on;
 an offering ready for the ground.
 among my friends, in all that crowd
 amongst devout coquettes, appalling
 among the guests a general dinning:
 And so, at last, feature by feature,
 among the guests she recognized
 among the maidens and the wives,
 Alas, Eugene beyond all query
 And all grandmothers who are listening
 And in their daughters' close embraces
 And now the door is opened wide,
 And suddenly her radiance lighted
 And then, to part us in full measure,
 along Tverskaya Street already
 And yet that goddess whom I'd never
 ``As for the other one... tomorrow
 At home she'll equably receive him,
 3 A statuette of Napoleon.
 ``Ah, Tanya, come to me, it seems
 An unknown yard, she sees from thence,
 along the Neva in a sleigh,
 Ah, all that my Onegin knew...
 And he remembers, in the quiet
 And Ivan Petushk&oacute;v; no, never.
 Applause. Onegin enters - passes
 A sledded coach, for years forsaken,
 As with old friends, she craves diversion
 among the neighbours round about.
 along the street lies dirty snow;
 along the street where slumber drowses,
 another, and his memory's fled
 another, a more chilling dream,
 another, freakish one, who stays
 another of the ball-dictators,
 around her neck, or when for her
 And how they weigh! I know about
 another's grin was sly and shifty,
 And with a smile the world caressed us:
 amongst the crafty and small-minded,
 another bard1 in exaltation
 another's joy, another's breast,
 adorns Aunt Helen, the princess;
 adorned the sanctum of our sage.
 adorning all its country ways.
 around Priam the much-respected,
 about one thing, till our next meeting.
 about them - nineteen to the dozen --
 a place for rest. Eugene alone
 a plain, unceremonious troop,
 appears offensive or amusing
 a pretty girl exactly like
 as pair by pair the dancers fly.
 approaches Olga; Lensky's signed
 a portrait with a charming touch;
 a passer-by; and on tiptoe
 a quilted chamber-robe and cap.
 already high in treason's league!
 already she'd assume ill-luck.
 a Russian hammer-blow, repairs
 already silvering all the plain...
 already studying to intrigue,
 already there she stands beside him;
 already tends too much to smile
 already yawned before the show,
 a red-foot goose, weight something fearful,
 a raging torrent, capped with breakers,
 a rest from toil and all its aches,
 across green meadows, dilly-dally,
 a restless urge for change of place
 across the drift-encumbered acres,
 across the plain's enormous room,
 across the public's toes; he steers
 a shambling hoof along the way;
 a stall, a kitchen and a fence.
 a sharp-nailed paw towards her; bracing
 a steed responsive to the bridle,
 a seedling fallen in the earth.
 a spirit strange, a spirit burning,
 Alas, on pleasure's wild variety
 And yet, although it's past conveying,
 All in good time, on each point I
 at soldier-husbands, and the drum.
 Alas, our youth was what we made it,
 And every minute his lorgnette
 5 ``A deliberate accumulation of conventional poetical formulae by means of which Pushkin mimics poor Lensky's own style... but the rich and original metaphor of the deserted house, closed inner shutters, whitened window-panes, departed female owner (the soul being feminine in Russian), with whi
 And my companion, so mysterious,
 And the sly baseness, fit to throttle,
 (a simile of this and that)
 At least you then showed for my years
 at sunken wax inside a bowl:
 A moment earlier, inspiration
 ``A place where you'll find none of us.''
 about what's buried in the past:
 a parodistic raree-show?
 Already now the talk was thriving
 a park, enormous and neglected,
 3 Anton Delvig, poet and close friend of Pushkin.
 a poet, and a Kantian sage.
 a patriot, a cosmopolite,
 already stirred him as they should.
 a riding whip. Tanya keeps walking...
 a rogue, a slanderer, a poltroon,
 a rambling walk beside my lake,
 a rooster head, and on the twitch
 arrested by the sheer perfection
 across each bush, across each steep,
 across our snows of northern bleakness
 across the Baltic in exchange
 a Russian family's old traditions;
 across the fields, round hill and rock;
 across the stage; he yawns: ``Ballet --
 across the years to our own time.
 across to her consort a weary
 arrives, the girl's exhausted gaze,
 as scarlet heels have lost their name
 a shadow, null and meaningless,
 a sham that trustful souls work out;
 a stanza villainously padded.
 as sacred, lies before me still.
 a secret truth, and at our cost
 at such vivacious, free good sense.
 a skeleton jerked by a cable,
 a suite of elegies that, throbbing,
 a slipper, or a magazine?
 a swift, polite reply is written.
 at some dull aunt's, sat down and knew
 a simple monument is built.
 a simple Russian family night:
 assembly, silent and dejected?
 as something not to be declared,
 a single thing to her. His head
 ``as sung of old, in years of glory,
 as smoke in azure sky disperses.
 a story that still wants completing;
 as Sadi17 sang in earlier ages,
 a scream rings out... the cabin's quaking...
 a stride on Petrarch's path, allayed
 absorbed me in the recollection
 a soul of sympathy and grace,
 a soul so innocent, so trusting.
 a soul that nothing can renew...
 a soul that perished long ago,
 a saucy kib&iacute;tka is slicing
 a tear for him... but what's to weep?
 attract the sneering of the jealous,
 anticipates a swim, in stead
 at the Academic Diction-book.
 as the perfection of our days!
 a treasure never to be shared.
 At least I'll give him some advice:
 at the same moment in her ear:
 at twenty, was a fop inbred,
 attainable!... But now my lot
 Alas for him! there was no keeping
 at thirty, lucratively wed;
 Another had the skill to ravish
 at this betrayal's fateful news?
 a tomb, a Cyprian shrine's invented,
 ``And here's the hearth,'' explains the crone,
 And just here, in the window-nook,
 And long, as if through mists that spurted,
 All who behold him find him strange.
 A man who's active and incisive
 At once Anisia came to greet her,
 A pause of silence and inaction,
 After a fine career, his father
 a tempting plume for you to take?
 at two-ball billiards prove his skill;
 although one in no manner shares
 Amidst the hills, down in that valley,
 Along the fronts of darkened houses,
 although it's nearly heard the knell,
 although there are no streets, no cards,
 after her own room, makes her fret.
 after Saint Chariton's gone past
 after that, supper's served, and so
 after the martyr's price it paid,
 after two minutes, off again,
 after your drive, it's quite back-breaking;
 a true companion to the end,
 a truly noble disposition;
 active, and hopeful, and insistent:
 acute and subtle - in a word
 an urge to sleep; soon, clear as clear,
 amusing, flattering with the best,
 a vulgar touch. I can't translate.
 advantages of heart and brain,
 at verse, and hiss an imprecation,
 advises him of dinner-time.
 a vivid brush, a witty rattle --
 as when chill autumn rains surround us,
 as well-read, though of pedant cast.
 a wondrous tenderness. And whether
 a word or two, or stare unseeing,
 as was the old suspicious sage,
 always before the volume ended
 always comes back: I'll not be wedded.
 always contented with his life,
 always monotonously gay,
 any Madonna by Van Dyck:
 a young girl's looking-glass is kept.
 as youthful sinning, or the strains
 as yours did, Homer, godlike lord,
 by clearing every sort of debt;
 by country freedom, rightful pardon
 by decent company, has not,
 breakneck by moonlight at my side!
 breaking the lilac bushes, smashing
 befitting such a noble pile:
 Blest he who's left the hurly-burly
 ``Bliss was so near, so altogether
 But go he won't: for him, a letter
 But he, by sad and rocky ways,
 But it's the talent for concealing
 by all is sweetly mutilated,
 But friendship, as between our heroes,
 beds, bridges, lawn, she never stops,
 before him roast beef, red and gory,
 before it was the golden play
 before the window taking station,
 But from the hero of my tale,
 But in that desert his attainments
 bigot or prude? or has he quite
 by heaven with such an unsubdued
 Bard13 of The Feasts, and heart's depression,
 Between them, every topic started
 Between the lines of text as printed,
 behind her followed wildly dancing;
 ``Boredom, that's what so bad, my friend.''
 blinded to everything about
 bring up a table, and a taper;
 bright Northern Cleopatra she:
 believes in her elected dreaming
 by mist of tears, without replying
 beneath it, vapour wreathed and coiled.
 by nervous hands of a schoolmaid:
 bored by success' giddy trifle,
 burst to a fiery blaze in season?
 bursts with cold envy and with bile?
 by sighs of passion or by praise.
 by some perverse schoolboy for sport;
 by six-page letters, rings and tears,
 But God, how deadly dull to sample
 but all concurred that, truth to speak,
 by the cold world's corrupt finesse;
 bathed in the moon's inspiring light.
 between two aunts, in pillared shelter,
 but from our friends, good Lord protect us!
 but groomed an anecdote-collection
 but I refuse to chop or change.
 but in it there are certain pages
 but, inside brackets, I'm contending
 but I won't praise you - let me join
 But it was passion that preempted
 bear, blackness, blizzard, bridge and crow,
 bear's gone; a hallway, no mistake;
 beauty with all its heavenly spell,
 by any itch for marriage ties;
 by blazing fireplace, and intone
 became like brother knit to brother.
 becomes a horse for all to see;
 by dreary snowdrifts piled around;
 by dull eternity's purlieus,
 by dint of cuff and kick and smack
 by drozhkies jaunting at full power
 bed-time, and time for guests to go.
 by fresh ennui as he reflected
 by flickering past us like a fence.
 before a fire too slowly flaming,
 before his eyes, imagination
 before Onegin there collected
 before she goes, she seeks permission
 before their eyes they see unfold
 before which life's horizon yet
 by fate's decree: this freakish stranger,
 But now! what brings you to my feet?
 be good enough to go on reading:
 begot by boredom out of greed.
 behind the door the clash of glasses
 bribe-taker, glutton and buffoon.
 brings out its faro pack, and deals.
 below a hill; a garden stood
 ``But, if you've kept some faint impression
 But now - oh God! - the thought of you,
 But she who modelled for the sketching
 bringing her unity and strength;
 But that's enough. My beauty's letter
 But you're not sociable, they say:
 by Baratynsky's3 wondrous pen,
 by calmly aiming at his pate
 ``By virtue of procrastinating
 by ancient limes, or by a brook;
 become a joke to us, its game,
 became their scrutiny's concern.
 because some glance of his has bitten
 by deep and shady woods protected;
 bidding us to reject for good
 be doomed to feel it: there's one goal
 breaks a new passage with his sleigh;
 blessed are daytime's care and cark,
 blest is the advent of the dark!
 blest the poor lover who reads out
 blest... though perhaps her fancy's caught
 before a cold, indifferent crowd,
 before first light they have appointment,
 before my gaze began to pass.
 before such candour of expression,
 before such playfulness of soul!...
 before the clavichord with knitted
 before the fire a table's spread;
 before you on the ground, unhearing,
 behind deceit or double-dealing?)
 behind the mill. In solemn talk,
 brigade of liveries in the hall,
 bright summer days that passed so slowly,
 by judgement of the modern camp
 billiards are dropped, cue put to bed:
 beloved friend, thou art my bride!''
 below the others who have signed
 by Lensky in his Olga's book;
 by magic everything instils her
 by moonlight two young girls took pleasure,
 ``But I'm denied this: all for you
 by my Eugene, not for his heart,
 beneath a shroud that's all dishevelled;
 by Naiads, one foot on the ground,
 beneath, a brook rolls its tribute
 beneath bird-cherries and acacias
 beneath the stone reposes here,
 by now his bride-to-be has wed
 by Neva, on a summer night,
 by nature, contradiction's friend.
 by now he's driving home to dress.
 brooding that is the lover's ploy.
 blooms when there's nothing else to do.
 by pain and languishment; she craved
 But when a later age has found us,
 broke greetings off, and gave Eugene
 boo Phaedra out as paralytic,
 boredom has just as sure an entry,
 But my Eugene that night directed
 But ours, whatever he might be,
 barrels, and then to drive aside
 But she refuses to perceive him,
 bored with hilarity, and weary,
 beside his heavier half is snoring.
 beside the window-sill, that bed
 bespectacled, in tattered dress;
 by Scott, by Seneca, or Byron,
 beside unfinished lines, a suite
 bestirred himself, was devilish active!
 bassoons and flutes begin to trip.
 by sluggish Lethe may be swallowed,
 but at the window, in the splendid
 but by and large their talk's a hash
 but brighter than the heavenly litter,
 ``But tell me, which one was Tatyana?''
 But when the hour of youthful passion
 both dull and ludicrous, the bunded
 but Eugene hasn't moved; for certain
 between their girls and this half-Russian.
 by the new whisper in the wood?
 bitter-sweet glory's inspiration,
 but Eugene's out from din and press:
 but from her shaggy-liveried ranger
 but for the effect that he created
 but first, the dreams that hope can cherish
 both hearts to blaze had now expired;
 but hold my tongue, lest it appears
 but held up by the simple fact
 but here comes our loud-talking prancer
 but here we must control our mouth.
 but I've not got the least intention
 but in an earlier age retarded,
 but in his songs kept pride of place
 but it's the first time you'll have known it,
 ``But so it is: I'm in no state
 but in the old days she had heard
 but I'm allergic to the North...1
 but in Zaretsky he induces
 but I, in love, was dull and dumb.
 but I perhaps will be declining
 but I've become another's wife --
 but just then Eugene's pistol flamed...
 Bubbles like Hippocrene are spraying;
 By chance those verses haven't vanished;
 By contrast, in the frozen season,
 Back to his regiment the Lancer,
 Beds are made up; the guests are all
 By dire presentiment awestruck,
 Bokharans, orchards, merchants, shacks,
 Below it, when sprang rains are swishing,
 Beneath storm's vestment, on the seaway,
 By now the rays of spring are chasing
 By now the shades of night are flying,
 By now the sledge is at the portal --
 By now the sun is climbing steeply,
 By now whist's heroes have completed
 Books, riding, walks, sleep heavy-laden,
 Bordeaux, you're like a faithful friend,
 Bards of our tearful generation,
 Baratynsky
 Boston and ombre for the old,
 But come, thou youthful inspiration,
 But, did they not corrupt society,
 But dinner's served, so two by two
 But, even by accident, her passion
 But ever stranger and more fearful:
 But he could draw a joking moral,
 But he's mistaken: Eugene's lying
 But how she jumped, when in this hovel
 But in misfortune or displeasure,
 But I myself read my bedizened
 But not today. Although I dearly
 But now Aurora's crimson fingers
 But now, in this vindictive pleasure
 But, now I've praised the queens of fashion,
 But now our roads are bad, the ages
 But now they're near. Already gleaming
 But now Vladimir's doubts are still:
 But onward, onward with my story!
 But soft! You hear? A scowling critic,
 But that's enough. At once, in stead,
 ``But there'll be such a rout and scrabble
 But the swift summer-time proceeds --
 But where, mid tragic storms that rend her,
 But was it happy, his employment,
 but just to make the bargain keener,
 But what about Eugene? With reason
 But you, grand tomes I loathe with passion,
 But you perhaps find no attraction
 Buy&aacute;nov, my vivacious cousin,
 Buy&aacute;nov's heels have split the wood
 Buy&aacute;nov tried - got flea in ear.
 Buy&aacute;nov whirls off Pustyakova;
 Beyond the stream there smoked and stirred
 but ladies' hands are not for kissing;
 battling along that watery freeway,
 but looks and talk took the direction,
 bottles to which some pitch is clinging:
 but no, my Moscow never stumbled
 but, nurse, you see... Oh, don't refuse...''
 but now grown plain and kind in stead,
 Bacchante-like, her flighty prancing;
 but never asked her husband first.
 By dreams now sad in their conception,
 Blest he who in his youth was truly
 but, lovely maiden, wilt thou not
 but now it bores me every minute.
 Believe (as conscience is my warrant),
 11 Ballerina, once courted by Pushkin.
 Byron
 But don't be cross, my darling friend,
 But finally she heaved a yearning
 But, in a fearful huff, his thrifty
 ``But I was simply not intended
 But let's return to our essential,
 but meanwhile let him live, and think
 but madrigals I've got to write!
 But now the radiance of the moon
 But then, oblivious of the city,
 ``But tell me who she is.'' ``My wife.''
 But to the garden, to the scene
 But who stands there, in this selected
 But you, blest husbands, to the end
 but now I've rather lost the art.
 but now my brain is darkened, Tanya:
 but now, thank God, you're well and steady,
 But here, with our congratulation
 But while she roams in thought, not caring
 but now the mansion is forsaken;
 but Olga would have never read!
 by two small oaktrees in a ride.
 but pantaloons, waistcoat, and frock,
 but piteous he, the all-foreseeing,
 but scarcely understood a word.
 but spared no glance for Cicero;
 but suddenly a snowdrift rumbled,
 but she (for women, that's not new)
 but salt; near the princess a vein
 but soon the ways we trod were parted
 both set him yawning just as much.
 but then a sudden breeze surprises,
 but then she found their choice was strange.
 but the salon's preoccupation
 but Tanya found she couldn't cry:
 but the unbending goddess-daughter
 but where are all your evenings spent?''
 but where such hymns in my direction
 but, when he'd rushed to Uncle's manor,
 but when past joking he fell sick,
 but when you've managed his despatch
 but whispers, the guffaw of fools...''
 but will, and reason's strong constraint,
 but wildly still her heart is rushing,
 but, without asking, they transported
 but youthful, virgin hearts derive
 but you'll undoubtedly agree
 but you're not paying any heed.''
 but your vile Helen's not my star --
 bound where the magic bow will send her,
 boulevards, chemists, and Cossacks,
 bludgeon the sense; it faints and whirls.
 brushes for teeth, brushes for nails.
 brushes on thirty different scales;
 blush to descry in looking-glasses
 blue smoke of chimneys goes aloft,
 by what's called machinal reaction,
 by writers of her admiration,
 by will of Zeus, the high and just,
 bewitches Tanya... he is able
 by waters that were still and clear,
 by way of secret tome that slept
 by way of toast to their fair neighbour;
 boys, country women, stately halls,
 beyond a doubt, its wondrous tracing
 beyond a string of dull tableaux,
 beyond the grave we all must build --
 boy-tribes with skates on loudly slice
 By enemies, no less by friends
 coated with a thin layer of spite.
 craving your tolerance in season --
 claiming Tatyana'd found her man;
 cheek upon hand she softly cries
 cherries then we'll throw at him,
 cherries throw and raspberries
 clears in a flash the freezing room;
 critics and their capricious vogues,
 calm men with beatific features,
 coldness of wit; each note he took,
 cold, pure as ice, and as unkind,
 cold reason, sleep in sensual welter
 calls out his name... All unavailing:
 commands our rhymester-brotherhood:
 comrades despised, and comrades rotten;
 come in and warm yourself a minute!''
 comes for awakening, comes for slumber;
 come, trouble my imagination,
 can disavow that. I have read
 Chapter Five
 culture, so far from healing, hurts us;
 compact of amorous trash, and worse,
 came out so soft, it scarce was heard.
 comes clearer through the mists of dawning.
 come to disturb me and affright.
 come to the fields, my friends! To horse!
 condemned the millstones as a sham.
 Chapter Eight
 condemns the monde and its excitement;
 conversing in a singsong voice;
 can it be true, and firmly stated
 can it be true, their crown at last
 can it be true you must await
 convinced at heart that my most zealous
 can lean on faith, who can dismiss
 conclude that it's high time she wed!...
 can read enough to get my fill.
 close as a shadow on the ground;
 choked up. There's no wreath on the bough;
 cooked-up where garret-vermin babble,
 closely embraced, in wending here,
 clock in the country rings the hour;
 coquettishness has got no trace --
 caricatured them in his mind.
 Chairs are pushed outward, loudly rumbling,
 caressing breath has fanned my face
 custom's bestowed us from on high.
 Chapter Four
 crossed to the window, read it through.
 choruses, Tanya can but wait,
 cartoonist-pencils of Saint-Priest;11
 council, and with profound head-shaking
 could I accept for just a minute
 could it be she... or had he dreamed?
 could it be she, who just had turned
 could see no harm in books; himself
 could they not give each other quarter
 could they not laugh out loud, before
 covered her face. When all came out
 covered the golden coal - the steam
 Clarissa, Julie, or Delphine6 --
 cows low, in the still nights of spring
 Chapter One
 Chapter Seven
 Chapter Six
 Compliment and congratulation;
 complete with broad-brimmed bolivar,
 ``Command me, darling, as you choose.''
 Compassion, yes, and indignation,
 ``Come to me in my golden halls.''
 condemned to a lifetime of hard,
 converting morning to midnight,
 Can she have found the enigma's setting?
 Capricious belles of grand Society!
 champion of rights, as in the wrong.
 12 Constantinople.
 custom is despot of mankind.
 Chapter Two
 Chapter Three
 1 Caf&eacute;-restaurant in Paris.
 Childe-Harold-like, Eugene's devoting
 could not conceive how solemn Grimm13
 Conjecture found unending matter:
 ``Can it be she?'' Eugene in wonder
 Can it be true, it won't come twice --
 Christmas came on. What joy, what gladness!
 ``Could I be happy circumscribing
 ``Could I just see the house, I wonder?''
 Could it not be that by convention
 came driving to his country seat,
 came distant horns, and gallant singing.
 can chatter, and be silent too,
 2 Count F. P. Tolstoy (1783-1873), well-known artist.
 (critical judges, strict as any)
 consequences of hideous woe;
 can't really be: for we've outgrown
 can yet keep nail-care much in mind:
 dead ash sets no more sparks a-flying;
 dear companions, darling friends,
 death on his brow, your friend should lie,
 dear ladies' feet fly past like hail,
 dean of Chaldea's learned team,
 deaf to the voice of your despair?
 dear Tanya, lover of illusion;
 Dressed like - --,14 duly dreading
 debauchery was praised, and studied
 declares itself in ways unwitting --
 deceived, was overjoyed to rest.
 dreamt of reproving what they'd done:
 defeated, turned up at his neighbour's.
 do fields echo with work and shout;
 drink in the midnight benediction,
 dumb I must perish, and alone.
 demanding: when will he reply?
 damns the intruders; Tanya lies
 don't judge the race before it's run --
 dared clean his nails in front of him,
 darlings, then we'll run away,
 daren't look behind her; fairly dashing --
 ditties of our secret world,
 Decreed in highest court for ever...
 dons of Epicurean rule,
 darkly above the water's lilt,
 Departure date's long overtaken;
 dip in their jugs; where shadows quiver
 darts to the boy, and looks, and still
 despite herself, is Lensky's doom;
 ditty of our secret world,
 Dogs, howling, rushed in her direction...
 ditty portends a loss; more dear
 drunk, eaten, yawned, grown weak and stout,
 Don Juan's and the Giaour's creator,
 doubted of it, so lived in bliss.
 diversely urging the same plea,
 devote to whist an evening party,
 devoured a book with rapt attention,
 down from his Kalmuck steed he rolled
 do with her when a flat reply
 daytimes and evenings passed alone?
 days that are lost behind the curtain,
 Diana's breast, the cheeks of Flora,
 Deaf to her sister's intervention,
 Dear Tanya, you're condemned to perish;
 Deep down, an epigram is stirring
 Drive on, Andryushka! quicker, quicker!
 Dmitriev
 6 Delphine, by Madame de Sta&euml;l, 1805.
 7 Dominique de Pradt (1759-1837), voluminous French political writer.
 down to the plain in turbid rills.
 10 Dancer and choreographer.
 Don't let a ghost be your bear-leader,
 down from the porch, light as the lightest,
 down in our damp earth-mother's womb!''
 down slopes of mountains, when a blaze
 down to the garden, and her eyes
 Deserving object: there can be
 drawn from a dim, warm-hearted past,
 did any glasses seek her face,
 Day faded; on the table, glowing,
 drank in your words when all was still --
 does he still pose, and play the freak?
 deep in distraction, his own rook.
 deep in Moldavia the abhorred,
 dreams of inconsequential cast,
 due punishment was handed down
 dressed up a desperate egoism
 drew scrutiny no less complete --
 dogged by one feeling, only one --
 drives home - and plunging deeper in,
 Dawn comes in mist and chill; no longer
 drive on! And now we see a-shimmer
 Days when I came to flower serenely
 drive there, and with formality
 delicious novels, laps them up;
 demanded. ``Yes, she looks... And yet...
 don't let me stray in paths unplanned.''
 don't waste your efforts on the air.
 direct from shipboard into ball.
 despite herself, rehearsed the part:
 desires and dreams and griefs were breeding
 doubts, to exhaust the heart, then fire
 devoted to the Muse, or learning,
 devouring Gibbon and Rousseau,
 dowagers smiled as she went by;
 Down there, by slow degrees, the stream
 Elated by the music's blaring,
 Each one by now is badly needing
 embodied by the power of dreaming,
 each in tumultuous turn descending
 each moral puts us in a doze,
 each object held a secret message
 each of us has his favourite lobby:
 each springtime, on the growing tree,
 excited not a hint of passion:
 etcetera. But her trepidation
 ended his wild career of fashion
 even by Ladies' Fashion Post,
 exercised, under lucre's banner,
 even if he drops or pines away.
 even in novels, vice entraps us,
 eyes rolling, arms uplifted, furious,
 ever so roughly rocked my soul!
 engaged then - but against her will;
 Elbow on table, spirit seething,
 Enchanted land! There like a lampion
 Each day, despite the appeals of reason,
 Each others' and their own successes,
 eight rubbers; and by now eight times
 exhausted and done up, I take
 enough of my loquacious lyre:
 enormous bear; Tatyana yelled,
 Escaped from social rhyme and reason,
 expecting winter, nature waited --
 explodes; wine fizzes up... but stay:
 empire, and fled it; happier still
 expose his soul to an intrusion
 earnestly striving for persuasion
 earth's rim grows light, and a forewarning
 earn us the favour of the Court?
 early tomorrow at the mill
 e sempre bene, gentlemen.
 enticing nets to do them harm.
 entered his sentence in the books.
 Even at home his occupation
 Evening, and darkening sky, and waters
 Eugene as clever, and quite sweet.
 Eugene, at Olga's side, was racked
 Eugene attends the boulevard,
 Evgeny! ``Ah!'' Tatyana, fleeting
 Evgeny, full of inward laughter,
 Eugene had no wish to betray
 Eugene has caught up, quick as quick,
 Evgeny, hating litigation,
 Evgeny looks at Lensky, chilled
 Evgeny read the sad epistle
 Eugene's a pedant in his dress,
 Evgeny stood, with soul regretful,
 Eugene takes Olga, and is gone;
 Evgeny thought in just this fashion.
 Eugene turned countryman. He tasted
 Evgeny waits: and here comes driving,
 Eugene was free, and as a dresser
 Eugene would willingly have started
 Elle &eacute;tait fille, elle &eacute;tait amoureuse.
 Enough, I tell you, that will do --
 emboldened by his Olga's smile,
 Enough I've wandered in the suite
 Enough, my friends; it's all so-so.
 ``Enough, stand up. It's now for me
 Enough. The load is off my shoulder!
 Europe's most finely chiselled wares
 each coldly plans the other's slaughter...
 Evgeny quietly began
 each grips his pistol in his hand.
 each news of her he'd been imbibing --
 encore Mo&euml;na,7 - and rejoice
 each took four steps across the space,
 endorsed by fashionable rabble,
 even in joke the heart won't shiver.
 even in our names (and how much worse
 even to count them throws me out.''
 even the scandal's not amusing;
 even without me it will sink;
 everything's dim and unenthusing;
 exists for me one special pair!
 evoke emotion's pitter-patter,
 13 Evgeny Baratynsky (1800-1844). Poet and friend of Pushkin.
 evoke for you a sombre bliss;
 Eugene forsakes the packed reception,
 Eugene, with solemn face, paid heed,
 Exhausted by the ballroom's clamour,
 epoch's portrayed, survived the ban,
 Evgeny echoed him: ``My second?
 Eugene's response was automatic;
 emotion, thought, and magic sound;
 Evgeny's total store of knowledge
 empty the purpose it proclaims,
 enquired the lady of the hall:
 else, having found his pleasure cloying,
 ensconced beside the window-pane.
 Evgeny loved him from his heart,
 earn for me the rewards of fame --
 Evgeny, whom the repercussion
 fraught with enticement and disaster?
 facing a belle I loved with passion,
 faceted muzzles by the rammer;
 fieldward, in noisy swarm, the bees.
 freedom and peace, in substitution
 freedom's enthusiastic dream,
 field-work, and walks with inspiration,
 foes, friends and loves, their voice is stilled.
 fresh as a poppy-flower, your face.''
 fresh from the cot, an infant pickle,
 fresh leaves... for such is heaven's mandate.
 feeling to what had long been heartless:
 freezes my blood... Yet all the same,
 frenzy which wrecks our lives for sound,
 frightened to death a timid love,
 frightening with all despair's disguises,
 flicker of swiftly twirling pairs,
 friends, foes, priests, guests, inured attendants
 friends, recollect how I surrendered
 flits Olga: ``now, tell me straight out,
 fail to perceive - that's by the way).
 felicitously every theme,
 filled him with thoughts that swarmed and whirred;
 full of his usual pith and wit,
 finding in that no deprivation --
 fancies, my rhythmic search for truth,
 fancies once more are hotly bubbling,
 find, in the trivial, serious matter;
 fancy, a wine serene in mood,
 Friendship, as I must own to you,
 finds her alone, and there they sit
 from all the world, they sat and pored
 from any gentlemanly distance;
 from Boston's cloth or gossip's quote;
 from ball to bed behold him come;
 from cruel fortune such a fate?
 from deepest backwood, furthest under...''
 from drowning's death in Lethe river
 from day to day she could but wait;
 frozen in his tight-fitting suit;
 from German realms of mist and steam,
 from her Monsieur took on the child.
 from her they strive to coax and coddle
 flown like an arrow, then he's given
 from off her charming shoulder's drooping,
 from the first moment it was heard
 from their own country? Then she shot
 frost gleams. We watch with gleeful thanks
 frontwise and back, that way and this.
 from whom he'd kept a letter, where
 from young Tatyana's dwelling-place,
 forward or back? it's true that he
 for angry heirs, as one, to fall
 13 French encyclopedist.
 from dish of water, rings are shifted
 from daybreak valleys lift the sun;
 from early morning on he will
 from gaol to greenwood, by such fiction
 from her my lips will learn and mark
 from Million Street16 came floating round;
 flown from society as we know it,
 flows and reverberates. Reciting,
 from table, clattering on the floor;
 from the agent, with this tale to tell:
 from thirty down to two; and stop,
 from waxen cell the bees again
 12 French poet (1755-1814). Author of Po&eacute;sies Erotiques.
 for aeons. Maybe it was fated
 From his first youth he'd known the force,
 for dreams, or journalistic battle,
 for dance, and din, and worldly ways,
 far from it! just one more collapse.''
 From all sweet things that gave me pleasure,
 far-distant heaven's vaulted room;
 for friends of languor, or of fun,
 far, far from Italy, his adored.
 fir, forest, hedgehog, raven, snow
 for God's sake, that will do. But, brother,
 forehead, he strummed, his vision flitted
 for heart's delight, or fun, you took,
 for him a lofty stair. His shade,
 for him all sham has found rejection,
 for him, at night, before the indulgence
 for him, the objective on life's chart
 for honour, a straightforward pride.
 for happiness, I sought, and ranged
 for happiness - that alien role.
 for her improvement, a roman,
 for her instruction, and her breast
 for her, no joy from winter-time,
 for his old courses to be changed.
 for 1808: his obligations
 for hours alone; she walked and walked...
 for hours, with elbows on the table --
 for in our time, beyond dubiety,
 for jokes, and rows, and merry dreams!
 for long... for evermore. We've chased
 for men to see, still in the scope
 for, mistress-like, it's brilliant, vain,
 for me to glimpse this Phyllis ever
 for maybe fortune will have saved
 for nature's unadorned reaction
 forgot. Its trodden path is now
 for Olga's beauty, Lensky gives
 fire of the cutlets' scalding fat,
 forgotten features. ``Can you say,
 forgot to think of town and friends
 for planting cabbage, like Horatius,
 for quite a while by fortune's hand.
 for raking up historic dust
 for shame and fear my wits are sliding...
 for Satan, love's a splendid joke.
 for swapping bullets with my mate.
 forests where my young age was passed
 for the bleak tongue of boorish clods --
 for Tanya, winter's ways are dread.
 for the footlights, this fickle traitor
 for the first time the Muse came near.
 for the sublime, and for the passions
 for the two ladies at the gates.
 for the young pilgrim. So at last
 first flakes of snow whirl round and sink
 foretells for her some wondrous role;
 for tempests and for feasts and noise;
 first snow for shoulders, breast and head:
 first, we'll take vanity, and let
 fortunate one, he'd not disgrace;
 fortune, and dignity, and glory,
 for unmeant kindness - how he shone!
 for vanity, and din, and glare!...
 for what's been given us to take;
 (for which he must receive due praise).
 for which of them the tomb was yawning,
 farewell you too, familiar mountains!
 for wood and tallow; all the range
 for whom her passion has been planned
 for whom, to expiate your crimes,
 for witty; in his Gallic way
 for your enlightenment to say
 for you have, at this early date,
 for you, I think, the humble dimness
 forty years long would criticise
 fate could be something else again..,
 fat P&uacute;styakov has driven in;
 fits us as if it were our own?
 found for its utterance that night.
 found that in laughter yawns could stifle:
 fruit liqueurs and an Almanack
 Friends of my Ruslan and Lyudmila,
 four fateful stairs. Then, without slowing
 fruits of my labour and my ink...
 8 Francesco Albani, Italian painter (1578-1660).
 fever of rhyme: thereby he's doubled
 fixing an early rendezvous
 fly to my corner like a dart,
 Faces before him flash and change
 Freed from its dripping cork, the bottle
 Fonvizin8 sparkled, freedom's champion,
 From early on she loved romances,
 From here, deep-sunk in pensive woe,
 From hour to hour a surer capture
 five hundred years) for sure our byways
 Foes! Is it long since from each other
 Friend of my heart, be at my side,
 Friends, all this meant was: I've a date
 Friends, how my heart would leap with pleasure
 Full of obedience and demureness,
 From that rough spell at last exempted,
 From violent passions fast pulsating
 Forsake, indulgent reader - driven
 For cousins from afar, on meeting
 For goodness' sake, you can't be serious
 7 Fortress captured from the Turks in 1788.
 For such am I. When you were speaking
 For several days she peaked and pined
 ``For then, Onegin, I was younger,
 Fare thee well, and if for ever,
 For what charade is he apparelled?
 Farewell, Petrovsky Castle, glimmer
 Farewell the games of golden childhood!
 ``Farewell, you realms that own the sway
 Fate saved Evgeny from perdition:
 fragments of poems from the North,
 fieldwork directed from the path,
 feelings he valued - from outside.
 feeling is quaint, and fit for fools.
 for grumbling, gossiping and swearing
 far more than most who leave this life.
 for Olga, on the spreading lawn,
 for she was bored by laughs and noise
 for us are instruments and tools;
 From widow Clicquot and from Mo&euml;t,
 fades from the view, and in the hush
 For it was custom that consoled her
 Farewell, familiar woods! Farewell,
 folly for me to interfere
 Fired by the god of inspiration,
 for them by fathers who, as friends
 Farewell to you, my free existence!
 Faublas'3 disciple for an age --
 for them, in Butterweek5 the greaseful,
 Five versts or so from Krasnog&oacute;rie,
 gentlemanly, quite precise,
 ``Gladly.'' ``So when?'' ``Why not tonight?
 ... &gt;2
 grey Filatevna, to present her
 gripped him no more; soon they were raising
 glitter and tumble as they go,
 galop, mazurka, waltz... Meanwhile
 good-looking, in the flower of age,
 Godfearing folk will institute
 God grant them years and years of health!
 God grant you took at least a grain.
 goes out into the courtyard spaces
 goes out of us when youth is dead.
 guests bow, feet scrape, and children squall.
 glitters with hoar-frost all about.
 goodbye to you, my true ideal,
 grow cold, and hard, and stiff as stock,
 go off to sleep quite hale and hearty,
 grows, surges, boils, for lack of room
 ghostlike, must trouble him who feels --
 garden, a modest home, the place
 girl reapers as the streamlet flows
 girls as they passed her spoke less loudly,
 girls often change to their contentment
 girls' tears, their swooning, for Eugene
 gossip, and tricks, and the patrolling
 get two young friends to pick a fight,
 give for a bookshelf, a neglected
 giving the lady their protection,
 gives way to nature's normal passion:
 gay nature and its sparkling distance!
 gazes at all the scene around;
 gazes at him... and nonetheless,
 Grandison, cousin, d'you remember?''
 God grant that from this little book
 God's thunder burn you up! And when
 Guillot, behind a stump in view,
 graduates of the Levshin1 school,
 Griboedov
 6 Gentleman, squire.
 Goodbye, for now we make an end.
 ``Goodbye, Onegin, time I went.''
 Gvozd&iacute;n, Buy&aacute;nov, Petushk&oacute;v
 Gvozd&iacute;n, exemplary farmer,
 Giving his pistol-butt a squeezing,
 giddy as Venus when she's mounting
 grey-haired and weak, beneath it only
 grew hardened to life's frosty clime;
 ``Get up: it's gone six! I'll be bound,
 great bard despite his modest trapping,
 ``Get up, my child, it's time, get up!
 glitters beneath its icing-sliver;
 good night; I swear I'll lie down soon.''
 ``Go, nurse, and leave me here apart.
 Give me a pen and give me paper,
 girls' albums, signed in blood for choice;
 5 Girl in Zhukovsky's poem who practises divination, with frightening results. See note 2 to Chapter Three.
 give me the homely hearth, and lend...''
 gave up the ancient Kremlin-keys:
 heaven's will - for you I'm set apart;
 hoar-frost and sun in freezing weather,
 hear my confession as I stand
 he changed the corv&eacute;e of tradition
 he consecrated to my keeping?...
 he carries her inside the door
 High rank, of course, and fashion's glasses,
 had been for ever borne off far
 had drawn Eugene's especial heed
 he'd drink his coffee, flutter through
 had fortune blest me by prescribing
 had gone in no uncertain fashion
 he'd got annoyed, the tricky devil.
 he drives there like a bird in flight,
 He goes inside, corpse-like of feature...
 he drives up in and out of season
 He opens up a door. What's that
 How long he'd been here, was her query,
 he and Onegin start alluding
 Hours pass; no answer; waiting, waiting.
 ``How slow you are at guessing, nyanya!''
 he almost begs for absolution,
 he almost lost his mind, expired,
 hear, once more filled with inspiration,
 he arrives - the cork goes flying up,
 heartfelt, imploring, touching trash
 he charged three roubles and a half,
 had been imposed by winter's hand;
 had chased me to the world above.''
 had come to him in field and glade;
 he doesn't hear when I address
 had filled this heart, and detestation
 he drives in brilliant sun; striated
 he drinks - all shout and take a swill;
 had killed his best friend in a duel;
 had left the squire no time to look
 had long been wasting and enslaved
 had long proved tedious to distraction:
 he'd listen to the administrator;
 had made his name, when, bold as bold,
 he danced attendance with the best;
 ``he dandled me as a small boy.
 had nothing to employ his life.
 had once before, across the scene
 had only debts on which to live.
 he'd pop the poison in his chalice!
 had ruled out reading, in their place
 he'd sack the Muses and get wedded;
 he'd see his soul cool in its grate;
 he'd swim this Hellespont; then later
 had won her loyalty! What soul
 had with its brilliant mantle crowned --
 he dozed away; but when the real
 he ended even your employment;
 he even dares, once in a while,
 he eyes the door, looks slyly through.
 heeding the press, will make us look
 he fed on hope's deceptive dinner;
 he fled from their resounding chatter!
 he failed to join that sharp profession
 he fell in love with darkest wildwood,
 he found all kinds of brickbat hurled.
 he found Tatyana so attractive,
 he found too much that he regretted:
 he goes ahead and parts the motley
 high time he should be on his way.
 he hears a voice; ``well, what? he's killed!''
 ``How long has he been on the scene?
 he gazed out on the threatening glow.
 he heard in stillness and in din
 he had conveyed some moral teaching,
 he had the talent of saluting
 he has to bring the battle-case.
 he informed this envoy diplomatic
 He was a good and simple barin;6
 he knew too well that sort of scene.
 he killed eight years in such a style,
 he leaves a tender verse behind,
 he leaves one morning the hermetic
 he leaves the house, calls for his horse
 he'll charm you with his fine invention,
 hold half the world still unreleased,
 held in constraint by pity's touch:
 helping the poor, or while I mended
 he looks, and sees the hour of day --
 he looks, in sweet irresolution,
 he'll spend before the looking-glass,
 hell's terrifying imprecation:
 he'll take you prisoner, you'll admire
 he laughs - they all begin to chuckle;
 he loves you... like your kith and kin!
 hymnal as, endlessly unfurled,
 himself just like a simple chap.
 him far enough through wild and waste.
 humbly I heard your lesson out?
 human reaction, every speech
 him prove it, writing after me.''
 he murmurs: ``Olga's mine for saving;
 homestead, before her parents' gaze,
 hymns of the ages never sound.
 henceforth in front of you I weep,
 hunts cheeky flies, with swatter sweeping,
 honest devotion to the good,
 he never took one from the shelf,
 haphazard; so, to God be thanks,
 hope sting it, then we'll try deploying
 hope that he's had no time to fashion
 he read, and read - no satisfaction:
 he reached the stream below the hill;
 he really forced one to admire him --
 He'd brought back all the fruits of learning
 here a weak version, incomplete,
 hereditary foes they seem,
 He'd given up girls - now gave up letters,
 he read of course the sceptic Bayle15
 her drops of tears, and seated there,
 He destined Olga's hand for me,
 He found them in some old collection,
 Horses and coach are spliced in marriage;
 Her father, kindly, well-regarded,
 Here, in his red peruke and glasses,
 her bow, as calm and as restrained.
 He gave three balls a year, and rather
 He lay quite still, and strange as dreaming
 Her husband enters, thus concluding
 Here insolent prize-dandies wither
 her discomposure, her confusion,
 Here stands, with shady park surrounded,
 Here with his wife, that bulging charmer,
 Hussars on leave are racing hither
 He sweetened up with fancy's icing
 He smiled as Lensky talked: the heady
 His wife, just like Tatyana, had
 He saw the sad girl's trembling state,
 How early on he learnt to trouble
 He wakes - and who is this who writes him?
 How many times I made a toy
 He who has lived and thought is certain
 How often, when the sky was glowing,
 How often would I fall to musing
 He was sweet-natured, and yet wild.
 He was too young to have been blighted
 However has he earned so vicious,
 her bosom heaves, her cheeks are staring
 her clever husband on the morrow
 her darling foot of its wet shoe,
 her eyes are lowered, but ablaze,
 He drained his glass down to the end
 He mounts the sledge, with daylight fading:
 herself not knowing how or why)
 Her frightened cry brought running out
 How heavy, and how near to sobbing,
 How oft she'd lead me, by the Tauric
 her face would pale, she'd start to quiver.
 her feelings were far more inclined --
 her full account of voiceless pain?
 her fingers shake, she doesn't dare
 her grief, and nearly ran away.
 her golden earrings off and whipping;
 her girlhood games; in them he'd shared,
 He reads to Olga on occasion,
 her head in modesty cast down,
 He's always with her: either seated
 her heartache, did it long compel her,
 her heart had long been overrun:
 her heart had spoken, free as air,
 her heart speaks to her even louder
 her handkerchief has fallen too;
 her hands affectionately pressed;
 her husband's or the world's attention...
 her kindness, move Tatyana; yet
 her little friends, Tatyana'd yawn,
 harboured by maidens of thirteen!
 her out-of-fashion clothes!... oh, mercies!
 her out-of-fashion turns of phrase,
 her progress at the masquerade.
 her seal with its engraven crest.
 here's boredom, madness or pretence,
 her secret work of magic suasion!
 her steppeland charms into a rout.3
 here's Petushk&oacute;v, the local fop;
 ``Here in the winter he'd have dinner
 her journey home is overdue.
 her look, so sweetly sorrow-laden,
 her love obeys the laws of feeling,
 her manner is no less contained;
 her nerves, she leant on it her weight,
 her path a hare in headlong flight
 her Russian was as thin as vapour,
 her sacred store of bliss and weeping
 he rested - wept for by his neighbours,
 here, seize it quick for this quatrain!)
 here's tea that Olga's been preparing;
 her soul's attention; just behind her
 her soul was waiting... for someone.
 here there's no conscience, here no sense;
 her thoughts away, knew how to lavish
 her to the altar and the crown.
 her worth (but anathematising
 her way; she passed, then as she walked
 her youth with all his repertoire
 husband and father as my lot;
 he's a freemason too; for him,
 his awkwardness, he's hardly said
 he stalked the drawing-rooms, remote
 his acts and words to suit our end?
 he's at the club, a real stayer,
 his beasts outdoors at dawn, nor ringing
 his beefsteak with champagne, or drown
 he's bowed politely; his attention
 his bow was wholly unaffected.
 his children and his faithful wife,
 his collar in its beaver braiding
 he's called you out - say, in your soul
 has come with Kharlikov; he passes
 his conscience's record, and so
 his converse gave Onegin pleasure;
 his choice could shock or might offend;
 Happy a hundredfold, whoever
 he's dreadfully dissatisfied;
 his dreams, while she whom they're about,
 his elegies flow like a brook.
 He deemed, in general, letters vain,
 How fearful, in and out of season
 has driven off, to find his own.
 he sleeps, away from glare and glamour,
 his freedom, in his youth's first flower,
 Her passion burns with stronger powder
 his French valet, Guillot, is there
 his foolish face; more pleasant yet
 has gone to Olga, swept the girl
 his gaze at Tatyana alone --
 his head upon her shoulder... blaze
 Hoar-frost that crackles with a will is
 has fixed; but for my heart to beat
 his heart was plunged! A sudden sound,
 he's happy, yes, he's almost well...
 How often on the steep Caucasian
 his dull, sick look, his dumb reproach --
 his destiny) without a smile
 his epigrams topped up with bile.
 he steers her, nonchalantly gliding,
 has felt time's desiccating blast?
 How often, with her sweet communion,
 he's first to toast her in the bowl,
 has found an end before his time.
 has found a port for his old age,
 has fixed on her a steady gaze.
 he's gnawed by serpent Recollection,
 he's got consumption. In his anguish
 his humbly suppliant approach,
 has hardly mastered postal prose.
 he's host, that's obvious. Thus enlightened
 his housekeeper and her department
 his hours to dreaming them away:
 his illness lends him courage and
 has kept him warm in chimney's blaze
 he's left sad footprints on the ground.
 his lyre, now stilled, in its high mission
 he's lost his self-command, and crazed
 has lately wintered, just a space
 has made the park her brooding-place,
 He followed them without illusion,
 his mind, in judgement still unsteady,
 He cursed Theocritus and Homer,
 High ceilings everywhere abounded;
 his mind's eye focused on the hinted
 he sang of lifetime's yellowed page --
 He got so used to this immersion,
 his nature would be changed and steadied,
 He gave his arm. In sad abstraction,
 his neighbour entered at a rush
 he sends a letter, penned with passion.
 he stood there, pensive and forgetful,
 Hm, hm. Distinguished reader, tell me
 his itching verse, Monsieur Triquet
 has left, and no one here has met her...
 his life till dawn's already making,
 he sends, a second, then a third.
 He lacked the slightest predilection
 He looks, and answers: ``Agafon.''4
 He nods - they start to fuss and truckle;
 his mother taps the window-pane.
 his nag has smelt the snow, and planted
 Horace
 he's moved... you see him from the side.''
 Herder, and even at times a Russian --
 2 Heroine of Zhukovsky's poem of the same name.
 has never staked his family seat.
 7 Heroine of Ozerov's tragedy Fingal.
 4 Hero of Mathilde, by Sophie Cottin, 1805.
 5 Hussar and friend of Pushkin.
 his news has set the party humming!
 Here comes the yard-boy, who has chosen
 Her eyes along the margin flitting
 Her loving spouse with approbation
 3 Hero of Louvet's novel about betrayed husbands.
 He sees: in slush, stretched out and keeping
 his mind, so cold and so precise.
 He's flown to Talon's,4 calculating
 His father died; and (as expected)
 His father failed to understand
 His hair was fashionably curled,
 His life went sailing in calm weather;
 He's neither died, nor lost his reason,
 ``How can one not love mother Moscow?''
 How dull are acting and evasion,
 He was without that dithyrambic
 has opened up his serving-trap.
 He could have spoken without harming,
 He gave this figure - loved with passion,
 Happy is he who's known its fretful
 He roamed the world, his lyre behind him;
 Hurrah! let's start congratulating
 Her eyes were opened, and she said
 Her feelings in their weary session
 he scowls - and the whole gang are still;
 he should have settled for disarming
 has painted for us the first snow
 his pup to grace the sledge, while he
 his pistols, laid them in their case,
 he's racing millward like a bird.
 he struggled to bite back the chilling
 his Sunday game of cards with me.
 his sobs, where his live tears were flowing;
 his spindly, shaggy nag. As fitting,
 He asks. She can't accept. Why ever?
 his Strasbourg pie, or point a moral,
 has something low and unrefined.
 his strangeness, wholly unaffected,
 his serfs rejoicing at their lot.
 his soul to a delicious rapture
 his soul with murmurs of distress.
 his style breathed love, and not the gibing
 has taken on a silvery gleam;
 his thoughts were on a distant goal:
 his thrusting horns, and as he passes
 he sounds, in lyric frenzy sunk,
 he's viewed the boxes without passion,
 has voices that are more resounding,
 his virulence that made you smile,
 he saw no point in staying on,
 his young heyday's supreme employment,
 he trembles, knows not what to tell;
 he takes her to a chair, beginning
 hate, love, joy, sorrow - every feeling,
 he turns away: ``I've had enough --
 have been a fool; yet he'd a right,
 have gnawed our bridges, and the flea
 have other maidens, since you vanished,
 have pushed their frontiers further out,
 have vanished, like an empty noise,
 how brilliant with its instant tear!
 how bold or bashful there, and here
 how envious was I of the waves
 how fearful, too, is my obsession
 he wakes; a bath where ice is floating;
 how many follies were engendered;
 how many lines of verse, and themes
 how pleasantly the stages pass.
 he warns his man for duty, stressing
 he was a menace, and a freak.
 how sad the scar of passion's knife:
 how sensuously her eyes are dreaming!
 how soon the bounds of rank and station
 how they remind me of your stem,
 he watched the guests and, as he dined,
 he would have found a normal fate.
 however much her soul has faltered,
 however scarlet; free from error
 however strongly she has been
 how well he knew the way to hurt --
 how well she'd studied her new role!
 He finds the shock beyond all bearing:
 ``Here, near Saint Simeon; in December,
 Here's tea: the girls have just, as bidden,
 Her tender touch had never fingered
 He sang of love, to love subjected,
 His unexpected apparition,
 His visitor from the beginning
 How could she? why, he'd never heard...
 He was no fool; appreciated
 He was the slave of a tenacious,
 ``How Tanya's grown! I pulled your ear
 he stoops and, tenderly confiding,
 his parents' patriarchal dust
 he's seen it all; with looks and fashion
 his tea with rum quite left behind,
 He's off - this ruthless legislator
 he's put belle Tatiana instead.
 his transports, and the marriage-bed
 He thought that Olga'd be confused,
 he strove to achieve the appropriation
 his sweetheart faithful to her grief.
 his song was limpid in its tune
 his soul still blossomed out, and lighted
 his tale of youthful love, narrated
 However closely he inspected,
 he's up the steps, with heart a-quiver
 ``How did you come to marry, nyanya?''
 How well he donned new shapes and sizes --
 his weary head, and softly drooping
 has wished it an abrupt goodbye --
 How early he'd learnt to dissemble,
 he saw that, as in cities, here
 his wit, according to the rules
 have clearly got the upper hand
 have each asked him to a soir&eacute;e:
 having by her severe demeanour
 how are your kith and kin today?
 how dull to work for the correction
 how I interpret this expression:
 he whirls her through the wood... a hovel
 how long is it?'' ``And since I fed
 He rings at once, and what a scurry!
 having decyphered on their brow
 He's here - Monsieur Guillot, my friend.
 have drenched the steel bit as they go
 have reunited friend to friend!
 How soft his glance, or at discretion
 have snorted, reared, and whitely foaming
 have your fill of revelry!
 have you read lines of your creation
 He's gone away and left his village,
 ``How long can you... ?'' ``Dearest kuzina!''
 He was convinced, a kindred creature
 he who has cooled down love with parting,
 how proudly, how divinely gleaming,
 he was a poet in his day.
 He sang of grief and parting-time,
 how to engage in talk that drew
 I
 It baffles me. But I'll repeat
 in a melodious, flute-like tone.
 in any picture of this kind:
 IV
 II
 in bed, a young man, stiff and chilled;
 I
 is dear to me, for it has brought
 IX
 II
 Imagine it: quite on my own
 It all seemed new - for two days only --
 I can see naught, as Hymen's foe,
 is deep in love, just like a boy;
 I acted thoughtlessly or not:
 in due succession; hers is lifted
 ``I can't sleep, nyanya: it's so stifling!
 is agony, if I may speak,
 is calling us, for ever calling --
 incendiary looks are slinking,
 in casual letters of confession --
 in dreams and cards and their prediction,
 is dressed, undressed, and dressed once more?
 in empty deeds and futile toils.
 ``I close. I dread to read this page...
 in far Moldavia, fit for pity,
 in fashion's din, at still of night,
 in fashion that's half-glad, half-anguished:
 ingenious London has been sending
 II
 IV
 it had its epigram-potential7...
 IV
 it had no sparkle of sensation,
 II
 II
 in goods and fame!'' But the sad-sounding
 IX
 IX
 it hurts, he laughs, and all in vain
 Italian nights, when I'll drink in
 I buttonhole a wandering neighbour
 in his small shack, will listen well
 if I, like you, had been a bard.
 in indolence and in rampageous
 in indescribable elation,
 is ``Kit''3 to every maiden's ear.
 it lacked, of course, poetic heart,
 in my long task, be my upholder,
 it melts, away it rushes, racing
 in manifesting, as he could,
 is mincing manners - nothing more.
 in morning time he'd read a book...
 it may be late, but it's a start.
 in order daily, chez V&eacute;ry,1
 in our affair, the intervention
 in Olga everything expresses --
 in Russian winters thrilled at seeing
 is represented rather truly,
 (it's all the same - you well correct us),
 it's also true, in battle's rapture,
 in secret judgement what he'd done,
 its due oblivion, in the hush
 is sad old moon's... Hark! snow is creaking...
 in sheepskin coat with scarlet sash.
 its furrow through the powdery icing;
 its glaring feasts, and shrill events,
 in sighs and boredom and deceits
 it's hidden deep in gloom and dust.
 it stirs her drooping soul to bound
 in sultry sleep, in lonely bed,
 it's late, time's passing... not to mention,
 its nullity I've always hated,
 it's not in him to bring me bliss.''
 it's new to us, beyond gainsaying;
 it stood, defiant of destruction
 its own perfection everywhere,
 its views, its passions, or its cares!
 its winds had blown him far off course.
 its wayward tricks, its violent surging,
 in tears and violent tossing vented
 IX
 IX
 in the mazurka he was light,
 in terms of poetry or passion --
 I
 is this the riddle's missing clue?
 into the mud, a drunken goner,
 into the social whirlabout;
 IV
 (in the romantic style, we say,
 is this the man that you were seeking?
 IV
 II
 is there to lisp its pack of lies.
 In backwoods, how d'you pass this season?
 in terms where not a word was spared:
 Iv&aacute;n Petr&oacute;vich still is dumb,
 into the tomb's mysterious shade;
 in unison repeat the cry:
 I
 I
 II
 IX
 IV
 is where old master took up station,
 IV
 ``I am in love,'' Tatyana's wailing
 in vain on my unworthy soul?
 it was goodbye, Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;.
 ``I am in love; leave me alone.''
 I ask you, each and every poet!
 in which, dear friends, we're all afloat!
 I could describe here his attire;
 I count each hour the whole day through;
 is a compulsive bore by reason
 I drag my footsteps hither, yonder;
 in everything she sees there's not
 in fact a thorough fop, no less.
 in friendly gatherings where I read,
 if I show wit in jesting thus.
 ``I dread your stern regard surmising
 I don't mean that she never shivered,
 is forced to crucify himself,
 in first place - listen, am I right? --
 in grief that nothing else could mend;
 In duels a pedantic don,
 I'd not have known you, therefore I
 I'd nothing to attract your humour...
 in ink with colour-wash above;
 in loaded carriages, migrate,
 ``I don't see what's so bad about it.''
 I drop my hero... I'll be truthful:
 is known today; only a soul
 in my petition an approach,
 in pairs, their hunger driving stronger,
 in stars upon the river-brink.
 its echoes, its belated urging,
 its natural right to rave and flare.
 in showing how to tell apart
 in triumph you'll see winter through!
 is this - one sees from here the party:
 in which the rhymester-man-of-fashion
 it was quite torn in half and breaking.
 it would be painful to depart
 in your cal&egrave;che of foreign cast --
 I do, I do. Well, where's he gone?''
 I'd love you, but inside a day,
 I don't know why, but for my friend
 I'd still like dances to this day:
 if not slow-witted, might have known.
 In days of carefree aspirations,
 in question, gossip, news and tale,
 I feel a brotherly affection,
 its image, then to swoon before
 inspires your lute to sounds of sighing?
 In fact one day a note came flying
 is the supreme reward. Precisely,
 I feel a small foot in my hand;
 I find no sense; the truth is this,
 It fascinates by its assurance
 In French Onegin had perfected
 I gave my word, alas, though now
 I had most surely never reckoned
 I have no leisure to recall;
 I have to drag my feet to it.
 III
 in fact by some quite different thought.
 it's my profession; he was wearing --
 I find myself no longer equal;
 I grasp a stirrup with affection,
 I gave no rein to sweet affection:
 Is he a Melmoth, a Childe Harold,
 I hear the wrath of your reproach.
 In heart's affairs, a sweet beginner,
 I hear you say. But can you see
 III
 inside the Larins' house fell mute.
 its grip on him, forgot to count
 is with dull trash that can't cohere:
 Is it that we've become officious
 III
 if her cross mood was at its worst --
 it's like a vanishing newcomer --
 III
 in you a tender pulse was beating,
 III
 (I, II, III, IV, V, VI,1) VII
 ``It is a friend I sing, a youthful
 III
 is in your poetry enshrined?''
 into an unbecoming brawl.
 in talk, so fruitless and so stale,
 I introduced my saucy Muse
 III
 I keep them, and will quote them here:
 I kept in mind an ancient store
 I'll float in gondola's seclusion;
 I'll gladden your imagination,
 I'll just remark, my verses talk
 I like to tell the time by dinner
 I longed, like every breaker hissing,
 is all those stubborn lips desire!
 ``I know it all: my secret ache
 I know it's now in your discretion
 I know to what malicious laughter
 I leave the verdict in your hand.
 (I like a friendly conversation,
 I liked his quality, the dream
 In languid silence, or the flame
 in all its mystery. Hymen's teasing,
 I'll stop that tempter from depraving
 in dark attire the new-born day.
 I'll save this blossom on the shoot,
 in deepest grasses, quite alone,
 I love my Tatyana too much!
 I love their feet - though I confess
 I meant to paint, with Alban's8 glory,
 in flowers of spring it's drinking dry:
 I'm at your service to protect you;
 I'm blind to every apparition;
 I make magnanimous confession,
 I'm much afraid that bilberry wine
 is finished, and I've looked it through
 I'm grateful now with all my heart.
 I might have seen you, heard you speak
 I might have said a word, and then
 is graven on that face of stone.
 in midst of trouble, storm or din.
 in which our hero used to dwell.
 I know (and seek your exculpation)
 I know, Godsent one, I'm protected
 I know it, in the thoughts of all
 I know too surely how it ends.
 I know your heart: it has a feeling
 Idle again by dedication,
 I'll conjure up that swooning fashion
 I lack the strength required to say
 I'll end my tale some other time.
 in the expression of its being,
 I'll catalogue each simple saying
 I'll feed the journalists for dinner
 I'll go, I'll go!'' - and in a stir
 in, past concierge, up marble stair
 in rural calm's most secret place!
 I'll make them spar another round,
 I'll part them, bring them back together;
 I'll sprinkle you with holy water,
 I'll set two ages by the ears.
 I'll say: with past ideals in view
 In love with fame, by freedom smitten,
 in others' houses she may say
 I love you (what's the use to hide
 I'm grieving still, but no more tears,
 I'm good for nothing now, my sweet...
 impatient, hatred flaming high;
 I'm near to sobbing, near to weeping!...''
 if you come with me, they'll be flattered;
 I'm altering my destination
 I'm old, my mind is blunted, Tanya;
 I'm sick, my dear, I'm sick indeed.
 I must wake up with the conviction
 I move in the grand monde? that rank,
 I'm yours, in a predestined fashion,
 it held me captive; tit for tat,
 ``I noticed once, at our chance meeting,
 in quiet flood. A beetle whirred.
 I married. I beseech you, go;
 I must translate - there's no presuming --
 I'm terrified - so let it be...
 I'm wandering in a world of dreams...
 I need to rest from all this rhyme:
 I never lived or wrote for praise;
 it's easy, without too much fooling,
 in winter was her heart's delight.
 If only Lensky'd known the burning
 I only write like this, you know,
 Idol mio or Benedetta,
 Is Others' View,5 that clever lyric,
 I own it: tender Parny's12 rhyme
 in deepest thought at the chess-board
 in frosted bottle, for the poet
 I pray God grant his soul salvation,
 In passion's sluicing rain they freshen,
 is only Olga: he relieves
 I put your genius to the test,
 I roam by the secluded lake.
 is brought to table at full speed.
 I really dote upon the word:
 I read with secret pain, and never
 ``I reckon, by God's will. My Vanya
 I regularly take much pleasure
 ``I?'' ``Saturday. The invitation
 I shall set out on brand-new ways
 In swarms around Tatyana ranging,
 It's agony to watch the hollow
 In such an album, friends, I too
 In second place the poet might
 If suddenly aloft she spied
 I see another problem looming:
 In stead of happiness, say I,
 I suffered once from all the madness
 I signal to each passing sail.
 I still find Gallicism delicious
 Is spleen his trouble, or the dumb
 It's late. A breeze begins to roister,
 In summertime - for he was leading
 ``It's nothing.'' And away he flew.
 ``It's nothing, nurse, nothing, I say...
 It's over. Supper is proceeding.
 It's right and proper that you went.''
 It's time: kind-hearted, idle creatures,
 It's time she went. But what can I
 It's time to drop astern the shape
 It's true, I'll not misrepresent them,
 It's true, the magnet-like attraction
 I thank him without reservation,
 In this, dear reader, if you know it,
 ``I think I'm happy.'' Time to go,
 Ist&oacute;mina,11 thronged all around
 I trust my fate to your direction,
 If Tanya'd had the chance of learning
 In the dark sky, a shooting star
 In the two sisters' rooms extended,
 In the white heat of some dissension
 In time past, objects of affection
 I thought, she'll go this time, perhaps;
 In Tanya, what a transformation!
 in midst of a poetic dream,
 In time, who knows, the agitation
 I too - when I recall Svetlana5
 I've drawn a plan and a projection,
 ``I've dreams and years past resurrection;
 in darkness in her room, or treated
 in Lyc&eacute;e gardens long ago,
 its barely noticeable stream.
 its newness with our faded days,
 in untold beauty close at hand.
 in your pursuit I've come to know it:
 I've known too many a haughty beauty,
 I've no one here who comprehends me,
 I weep, and pray for your protection..,
 in Adam Smith was his diploma;
 I've paid my due to classic art:
 I would have found a friend, another,
 in albums, blunted the censorious
 in a peaked cap, all dust and fluff, --
 in a still stream that never dries.
 it blabs, and spills them in its tracks.
 in britzkas, kib&iacute;tkas and sleighs.
 I would have chosen none but you
 imagination, with such reason,
 in all the world could take my heart!
 it brought back Tanya from her trance.
 in boxes or the rows of stalls.
 it can't be youth's distemper - love?
 in corners whispering girls concur;
 in country towns and suchlike places
 is death, not pain. So gently gliding
 in deep anxiety of mind.
 in dream toward the woods and plains,
 is dimmed. Down there the valley soon
 in darkest forest depths and drowned
 inexorably wed to duty,
 ``I weep... In case there still should linger
 is either the distrait Vampire,
 I've seen how, trustful in his blindness,
 I write, my heart has ceased its pining,
 in flannel, and an old fur cap.
 is firmly cast. I don't know whether
 in her own home. She never took
 in her torn heart - a fickle gleam;
 is it not true that Russian speech,
 is it that she, poor simple sweet,
 I've run a mile, I must avow,
 in father's or old uncle's book,
 in gossip's rambling and discursion
 is he who's never felt its will,
 if I had power to choose your fashion --
 it led him, in these early sessions,
 ``I write to you - no more confession
 it frankly, I'm a firm adorer
 I was just thirteen years of age.
 I would have had the indiscretion
 (IX,2) X
 in front of you, on every hand,
 in her once more has come alive.
 inherited from earlier days
 in his defence, and smash it up;
 in his first dream of passion's fruit,
 if I'd possessed the slightest reason
 In winter, when for longer time
 is in voluptuous languor dressed,
 is lost in obstinate reflection;
 in lives that were just dawning then.
 immortals picked by fate for when,
 in music's own bewitching fashion
 I was Onegin's friend that season.
 it mastered him in slow gradation;
 if, motionless, no life appearing,
 inns don't exist; but in a freezing
 is needed, nothing's left to tell.
 it needs no gold if a supply
 ignores approval's friendly clapping,
 in one so slothful, so hard-bitten?
 in other things you come off best:
 is on his feet - in utter stillness
 in our first ages), from no place
 is out of fashion in our time.
 in play with her obedient doll
 impart such lessons as you please!
 importune with my lyre, whenever
 impatiently on the mill-dam,
 in quilted coat, where rays were gleaming
 in quilted dressing-gown adorned,
 in rose-trimmed bonnets, but malicious;
 in Russian never found expression,
 installed in me a different devil,
 inside a pocket Triquet nurses,
 in sledded coaches and coup&eacute;s,
 instead the chance to get acquainted
 ``it seems that he forgot us all.''
 is softly, indolently sleeping,
 is seized by Tambov's poet-sage;
 in silence all day she'd remain
 in solitude, as at the start
 in sensible old-fashioned style.
 its pristine charm: heeltaps, and leaps,
 its sails go flap-flap as it prances;
 insists, when the mazurka ends,
 ``it's time!'' and freedom hears my hail.
 its work, its torture, its enjoyment,
 it's yes or no, but never sir.''
 into a corner, gently makes her
 into a modish tyrant's keeping
 is that my feet lack strength to go
 in that new couch, no sleep for certain;
 in that one sound, for Russian hearts!
 into a small quit-rent - and got
 in the deep stillness of the night,
 in these last years all mixed and fluttered.
 in the full beauty of its frown;
 in the far backwoods' deepest heart,
 in their gay glass, the borrowed light
 in the salon new faces meet,
 in the saloon, brocade-surrounded,
 in taffeta of mourning black.
 into his look, the exhibition
 in this fifth chapter of my work.
 in twilight of all&eacute;es of lime.
 is this then what you can't forgive?
 in time (to quote the calculation
 is tinsel on a life I hate;
 interior d&eacute;cor in the end
 in through the door, at swallow's pace,
 into the all&eacute;e, face to face,
 into the cups its darkling stream --
 into the fields, surveys the morning,
 into the pan. Securely gripping,
 I've learnt new sadness; but in this
 I've learnt the voice of new ambition,
 I've wasted too much life away!
 I walk the shore,17 I watch the weather,
 into the tomb's wide open portals,
 it touched with reverie her leisure,
 invention sparkled, then gave way
 invariably, as time went on,
 in which his hero's mould was cast.
 in which so lately it abounded
 it will be our descendants who
 in winter, on the cast-iron fender,
 in warmer airs was half dispersed.
 it was that he'd been truly stirred,
 if you'd still been with me, dear friend,
 (if you'll turn back to chapter one)
 is yawned away with friends and wife
 jealousy's flame, to light desire;
 jealously, shyly, I've imported
 just as she'd always been, she tripped
 just as the Poet15 paints himself.
 just at this crisis of his gale,
 just like a casual guest who might
 just like a shadow, or a wife.
 just like, on turf, your fleeting tread.
 just now of wrestling with his shade,
 just send your grandson on his way.''
 just there, is talking to the Spanish
 just what the nightmare signifies.
 just yesterday.'' ``And since your christening
 jaws masticate as minutes pass:
 4 Jean Lepage, Parisian gunsmith.
 8 Jean Sbogar, by Charles Nodier, 1818.
 3 Julie, ou la nouvelle H&eacute;loise. by Rousseau, 1761.
 Just facing Tanya's where they're sitting;
 jointly would tread life's humble way!
 Just before dinner, from his labours
 ``Just half a glass more... that will do...
 Just let yourself be your whole care,
 just look, and never mind the chatter...
 just sentries to each other calling,
 killing each evening off like that?''
 knowing the offender, he'd been frightened
 kept asking: "shall I live to see"...''
 Killed!... At this frightful word a-quiver,
 L
 L
 L
 L
 LX
 LI
 LV
 LV
 LI
 &lt; My gaze pursues them... but on station
 LI
 LI
 Ladies came over, crossed to meet her,
 like Delvig3 when he's dining drunk.
 Ladies of such a cast, I think,
 Left-handed from the habitation
 Legends, and mystical traditions,
 LII
 LVI
 LII
 lend ears to my lugubrious tone:
 long life to our dear friend, Bordeaux!
 let not the poet's soul of passion
 lively, capricious, and inane...
 LIII
 LIII
 ladies who glide on waxed parquet.
 LVII
 LVIII
 Like convicts in a dream released
 Like modish parquetry, the river
 Like modish rhymes that lack all reason,
 Lel6 floats about above her head;
 La morale est dans la nature des choses.
 Lending his tone a grave inflection,
 Lensky at home awaits the answer,
 leads Olga and Tatyana on
 led to the princess, all a-shiver,
 lies bright, and vast beyond perceiving;
 light as a shadow, shuns a meeting,
 like a drunk traveller in a shelter,
 like a majestic moon, she drives
 like a true friend, to speak my name.
 (like passion's dream, that other revel)
 long, long ago... no, that could be
 long, lively tales from wonderland,
 long since unstirred by praise and fame
 looks at him with a steady gaze,
 &lt; Petushk&oacute;v's nails and spurs are sounding
 lest he should by some clever trick
 late of Tambov, Monsieur Triquet
 lived to the age of twenty-six;
 love's crown, delectable, awaited
 Lensky all evening, in distraction,
 Lensky composed in autograph
 Lensky disliked the entertainments
 Lensky had a curt word to say
 Lensky has watched: his rage has blazed,
 Lensky ingenuously related
 Lensky of course was quite untainted
 Lensky rejoiced. His designated
 Lensky, restored to his manorial
 locked himself up inside his den
 ladies at the fireside confer,
 lift up the gauzes of her veil,
 like a sweet child. She'll never say:
 like fluff before Aeolian breezes;
 like irksome phantoms, null as zero.
 like mindless youth, the waltz goes by
 like native idiom from their lips?
 like Regulus, that god of honour,
 long since, like brother linked to brother,
 lions adorning gateway posts
 lorgnettes of jealous fashion-leaders,
 lost them without regret's contusion,
 let fall his pistol on the ground.
 let no more such digressions lurk
 lay on the fields; in caravan
 Lensky resolved before the duel
 let's go where, winding all the time
 loved someone else, not her intended,
 Lensky's estate, there lives and still
 Lensky's thrown down. The murk is thick
 Lensky, that tragic victim, died...
 2 Lines discarded by Pushkin.
 Longtime inside this modish cloister,
 ``Look quickly to the left, d'you hear?''
 ``Look to the left? where? what's the matter?''
 Lord Byron's portrait on the wall,
 Lord Byron, with his shrewd caprices,
 leave far behind that city-gate.
 Listen to me without resentment:
 Lost in our backwoods habitation
 9 ``Lasciate ogni speranza, voi ch'entrate. Our modest author has translated only the first part of the famous verse.'' Pushkin's note.
 lacing her stays up very tightly;
 log cabin a pretentious-teasing
 lightly attired, like the creator
 like Chatsky,5 he arrived to fall
 land where I learned to love and weep,
 land where my heart is buried deep.
 looked down in an access of hate,
 looked on a river: far away
 &lt; that there existed, for the indulgence
 let evening pass, tomorrow too --
 ``Last night, what made you fly so early?''
 let me acquaint you on the nail
 liven the drowsing of my heart,
 &lt; XXXVII7
 La, sotto giorni nubilosi e brevi.
 Let's go, our friendship's worth the labour!''
 &lt; ...
 &lt; amongst the soulless men of pride,
 Let others learn from his example!
 ``Let's go.'' The friends, all haste and vigour,
 LIV
 LIV
 Love passed, the Muse appeared, the weather
 5 Lover of Val&eacute;rie, by Madame de Krudener, 1803.
 Love's frantic torments went on beating
 Love tyrannises all the ages;
 lickspittles who adore their crawling,
 ladies of riper years, delicious
 left her to follow her own line,
 left quite alone with his own soul,
 life's real meaning would have found him;
 light dreams for new ones... so we see
 like foliage in the rotting fall.
 look through the pane, and squash the flies.
 Let me look back. Farewell, umbrageous
 Louder and louder sounds the wrangle:
 lies in a coverlet that ripples
 lifts her from bed as it foretells
 like fields in spring when storms arrive.
 Lovelace, or Grandison, or neither;
 look here, as a provincial miss
 lest in forgetfulness complete
 LIX
 listless, impatient, for the pounding
 last many a day, and many a night!
 last night he'd erred in making fun,
 lest signs of casual weakness drew
 lately he married off his boy.''
 let's go together, take a rest...
 love's melting dreams shall fill my rhyme,
 levy their tribute on the plain;
 lawgiver to the modish world?
 Malfil&acirc;tre
 my Africa,18 where waves break high,
 meantime she'd give the maids a beating
 meanwhile a hallboy handed cream;
 meanwhile the local Cyclops, aiming
 meanwhile with a dissembler's duty
 my carefree song would thus reveal
 madman, can you forget their print?
 made all fates look the same... and so
 my declaration may give rise!
 made London's dandy his professor.
 made over to them his whole lot,
 my disillusioned glass, and yearn,
 midst crones with endless tears to shed,
 my friends, I need to pause a spell,
 my father blessed me. So I'd spend
 my fate, it leads me to what end?''
 magic of sleep had started claiming
 my giddy mistress made me proud.
 my golden days when spring was dear?
 might have resounded long and loud
 my husband for his wounds in battle
 my house, my evenings, all that state --
 my hours in fear and bitter crying.
 maiden in this superb, unthinking
 my inept pupil, at that hour,
 maid-servants from the whole estate
 make Juvenal his text, or better
 makes to her nurse low-voiced remark:
 my life in a domestic plot;
 mills, lands and waters - he whose goods
 my last poor lepton for a sup!
 my little feet, where have you vanished,
 military-foppish, diplomatic --
 moment the assembly seemed to shake...
 menu, hung up for show, excites
 men made their bows, and sought her eye;
 my noon is here, and that's the truth.
 men's thoughts, their plots, the words they speak,
 monsters the maiden stood revealed.
 moonscape, the half-light overall,
 more and more brightly still they blaze.
 more and more bored by yearning's text,
 more closely at the grammar-book;
 more joy still when with mute insistence
 more searching than Chateaubriand;
 more tender than it used to sound.
 more thoroughly, thank God, the creature
 my span, that fortune's jurisdiction
 must be my theme, if you'll allow.
 must be to hold in detestation
 myself and Eugene, lest a reader
 misunderstanding, noise, and blame!
 must now employ my pen; somehow
 my strange, incorrigible man.
 my student cell: she opened up
 my soul had heard your voice ring clear,
 meticulously; in my fiction
 my tedious taste for feeling free.
 Meanwhile the news of Eugene coming
 Madame de Sta&euml;l, Bichat,13 Tissot,14
 Manzoni and Chamfort,12 perusing
 my soul in secret gave survival;
 My love for it is just as tender,
 mother implored me; my sad station
 (my tale's beginning here repeats);
 my tongue kept drawing from the heart --
 my thoughtless pen has stopped designing,
 ``My dearest heart, you're sick and ailing.''
 More wine, he calls, to drench the flaming
 methodical by disposition,
 motionless as one soundly sleeping
 ``My dear good sir, I'm short of money.''
 Maidservants on the beds just now
 ``My sweet, my dearest heart, I'm old,
 my task, so vivid and so serious
 mountains are piled on every carriage,
 mountains will part; below the deep,
 moved and surprised, she stays serene,
 moves the young watcher (as was known
 my wretched Lensky in his heart
 16 Millyonaya, a street parallel to the Neva, and one block away from it.
 Moscow, loved daughter of Russia,
 My soul's like crystal, and tomorrow
 my word; no welshing, as I live. &gt;
 Meanwhile another new landowner
 Meanwhile my novel's opening section
 Meanwhile Onegin starts to languish:
 My early bird! you know, last night
 may spend a century in flaying
 Meanwhile, attired for morning strolling
 Meanwhile with pain her soul was girdled,
 My friends, the bard stirs your compassion:
 My goddesses! Where are you banished?
 maybe bore off with it for ever
 ``My goodness, how the years do fly!''
 10 Magazine (1818) edited by A. Izmaylov.
 may then amuse my glad decline.
 My heart awaits you: you can turn it
 ``Maidens, pretty maidens all,
 ``Make way, make way,'' goes up the shout;
 Melpomene wails long and loud,
 7 Melmoth the Wanderer, by C. R. Mathurin, 1820.
 Melmoth,7 whose roaming never ceases,
 My mind is fuddled.'' ``Tell me, nyanya,
 Moments of silence, quite unbroken;
 Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;, the mediocre,
 My pen, as once, no longer hurries
 Martin Zad&eacute;ka fails to mend;
 Martin Zad&eacute;ka was the siren,
 More tolerant in his conception
 may chorus, when she comes in sight,
 may wind up my career as poet;
 ``My sweet, God warrants me your debtor.''
 Moscow has beauties and to spare:
 Moscow... how many strains are fusing
 Moscow's the place, the marriage-fair!
 Muse of the epic, bless my work!
 Mushrooms in brine, for winter eating,
 ``My uncle - high ideals inspire him;
 no deathless truths, nothing scholastic;
 no dream. You'd scarce arrived, I reckoned
 No, early on his heart was cooling
 Now for the first time she's escorted
 no beauties of a foreign clime,
 no brilliant truth, no vivid scene;
 no, even her eyebrow never quivered,
 no, forests are the sole retreat
 No one will think that worth gainsaying,
 Nasce una gente a cui 'l morir non dole.
 Notes to Chapter Six
 ``Now march.'' And calmly, not yet seeking
 no, all devoured by passion's madness
 no artifices of the vain...
 no boy, to fight or take offence --
 need not have bristled like a beast;
 no fuss; our belly has the power
 no glance so sweet, no sigh so teasing,
 night of the second, started flaking.
 no haughty stare around the press,
 Now powder's greyish stream is slipping
 noise in her ears, glare in her eyes...
 No, I was born for peace abounding
 No path to see: the snow has drifted
 Nursed in the orient's languid weakness,
 neighbour was sure, from this would flow
 no matter: hope, in child's disguise,
 no notice of them. But I've chattered
 nanny, companion of my youth;
 no paradise can stay serene.
 No doubt about it, it's Eugene.
 no mansions, no ballrooms, no bards.
 no move she makes, no breath she draws;
 No, she's already pledged her word
 none listens when the others speak,
 no, quite naively I'll retell
 No, all in her was calm and plain.
 No, never in the hottest fire
 Napoleon's our sole inspiration;
 nor crawled in suppliant attire.
 Notes to Chapter Four
 nor from the bath-house roof be clearing
 nor turned a poet. In the burst
 no sound by which her soul is stirred.
 no, Tanya's more endearing far.
 No matter; fate's decree is just.
 ``No, no, I'm sure the party's small.
 Notes to Chapter Five
 not cold, but also not effusive,
 November stood outside the door.
 Now all was still. Tatyana slept.
 Now brooding thoughts hold his attention
 Now hear the friends in dialogue:
 nonsense will earn indulgent looks,
 nor will my scribbling in such books
 Now, faced with this enormous revel,
 no trace of ink, no spots, no stains.
 Now he's returned, what role's he dancing?
 neighbours in high content are wheezing;
 no longer does the herdsman chase
 Now Latin's gone quite out of favour;
 no magic fancies of the poet,
 Now she's alarmed; in desperate worry
 no, nothing caused his heart to stir,
 Now the mazurka sounds. Its thunder
 neighbours and friends in kindly group,
 no meaning in or out of season,
 no mannerism, no affectation,
 no noise of gaiety, no time
 no, not for long were belles the ruling
 no one recalls him or his verses;
 no one was ever so engrossed:
 no proud pretentions to success,
 nor his,2 who sings of Finland's maid.
 Next day Tatyana, early waking,
 no spark of fun in all its rot!
 no softball for the winds of fashion,
 not bad at all; and then each soul
 not even by chance, once in a while,
 no time to pick it up - she's dying
 No secret crimes, and no perditions,
 not only pain, too much to meet...
 Necker
 No sleep, beneath that silken curtain,
 nothing could alter or could tire
 not separation's chilling power,
 never come and like a spy
 now a protruding branch assails her
 now, by green tablecloths awaited,
 now golden autumn's just arriving.
 now I've forgotten all I knew.
 Neighbours in whispered tones are taking
 No one's, I swear by God! in sadness
 no word came flowing from his quill;
 No answer comes. Another letter
 now things are changed, now we resemble
 Not so? ``No, sirs, the ode's the thing,
 nothing you did gave cause for blame:
 not only by Evgeny's eye;
 not the plain, timorous, dejected
 no vision of her fields is dawning.
 now as before, inside my breast;
 now even Didelot's tedious stuff.''
 now free, I once more weave together
 new guest is gradually progressing,
 now Lovelace's renown has faded
 now she's bereft, and just the same
 now sweet, his slumbers are distraught.
 now sensitive, and now carefree,
 now ten has struck, his wheels are rolling,
 now warmth and blossom are on hand,
 ``No, every minute of my days,
 No hope! no hope! He leaves the revel,
 No, incorrect and careless chatter,
 Noise, laughter, bowing, helter-skelter
 No look, no word for him: she's chosen
 No, soon she changed her old demeanour:
 No tearstains, nothing. Wrath alone
 Notes to Chapter One
 no years of absence past returning,
 No answer comes. He goes, for better
 No feast, no welcome-gifts - with fire
 No ice and flame, no stormy weather
 No madrigals were for inscribing
 No moralizing from this joker;
 Napoleon here, intoxicated
 ``Nurse, I'm not ill; I... I'm in love.''
 Notes to Chapter Seven
 Notes to Chapter Two
 nothing more lovable than he.
 Notes to Chapter Three
 not every day could he wash down
 ``Now don't suppose... let no suspicion...
 Now here's a letter, as you see,
 nothing was barred beyond discussion --
 Now nearer... hooves... and in the yard
 not to see Olga; in a fret
 no vulgar epigram too much,
 now pay attention, I beseech,
 Never come and overhear
 Now, Lensky, would it be so bad
 Now Nature's tremulous, pale effect
 new depths of boredom.'' ``No, the same.
 No word: another day goes by.
 not even in her earliest age;
 not for the first time he succeeded
 not once a day a thought will quiver,
 now dazzled by one thing's effulgence,
 Now, she devours, with what attention,
 Now that the British Muse is able
 Now Tanya's groaning, now she's sighing;
 now crush with sorrow's dull deployment
 now disenchanted with the next,
 Now, to my cost it may be true
 on a fast stallion from the Don,
 of aunts and mothers, and the thrall
 or borrow, say, from me, if not.''
 Onegin, drenched with sudden chill,
 of a delicious, guiltless dream...
 of a provincial ing&eacute;nue,
 on billiard-table rests a cue,
 once I too liked it very much;
 of children, though as young as they,
 once on the highway he'd detected
 of course! you're bidden there next week.''
 once, with its foaming and its playing,
 old mother winter at her pranks.
 of distant countries, of moonlight...
 of Dian's visage, in our fancies
 Once home, he brought out and inspected
 Once more he counts the hour-bells tolling,
 once more renounces world and din.
 on cups of coffee, and then later
 Onegin, d'you recall the day
 of calm and reason, when the flame
 or did her grief soon find repair?
 Of course, the love of tender beauties,
 Of course. Yet fashion's wild rotation,
 old Uncle's end was soon to be.
 one day came down that lonely turning,
 of evening, and those tears, the balm
 of every funeral far and wide;
 over his neighbour's plain memorial,
 one listened to a chief of mission
 one pair! I pay them memory's tribute
 Onegin comes, and makes excuses;
 or else disturb my mournful trance
 on Eugene, he was deeply stirred:
 or else a query's wondering hook.
 or else does nature, fresh and staring,
 or else, from far off, he could see
 or else lifts up a fallen shawl.
 Once Vy&aacute;zemsky,4 who chanced to find her
 O dreams, o dreams, where is your sweetness?
 or else, my friend, how does it look?
 or else... or else, may God forfend it!
 opens the door a tiny slot...
 over the note holds in suspension
 over the slush, where is he chasing?
 O Adrian waves, my invocation;
 of far-away Onegin's name.
 of hills has hid the moon; for certain
 of hope and gloom, romantic-fashion,
 of happy love. For I have been
 of husband's friendship - worst of all!
 of his own room, how cruel spleen
 of house-familiars stands dismayed...
 On an old aunt, who's long been burning
 O Brenta, I'll see you in dream;
 or for the modishly luxurious --
 of hope is somehow still surviving
 ``OE'' devotedly inlaced.
 on goose's neck, a skull looks cheerful
 on her conquest, we leave my sweet;
 Once more he turned to books, unchoosing,
 others prescribe a watering-place.
 of instant thoughts, a fleeting trace
 Onegin had no word to say;
 on a small bench by Tanya's bed,
 on Christmas Eve, he wished me joy:
 Onegin spoke about its flights
 once more that touch is fiercely troubling
 once more the love, once more the smart...
 or cunningly create a quarrel,
 of certain ladies' tiny feet.
 or cause the bursting of his bubble,
 Onegin's soul encountered there
 Onegin without more ado
 One melancholy fop, declaring
 Omens dismayed her with their presage;
 Or he knew how to reconcile them
 Of Lensky's fate they said no more --
 O Russia!
 of ardent speech, that aching flow
 O rus!
 On these, with something like obsession,
 of boiling youth did I desire
 Outside the gate Tatyana parted
 once more Corneille's majestic story;
 or dim her, dazzle as she might.
 on dining-chairs are all prostrated;
 over it a mysterious wreath:
 of eloquence, and just the same
 Onegin looks with eyes of fire:
 Onegin too - and there to see,
 Of those who heard my opening pages
 one smoothes the pillows down in bed,
 Olinka yawned, just like her neighbour,
 O, never know these frightful dreams,
 over the modish word ideal,
 one thing inspired his breath, his heart,
 Onegin - now once more my theme --
 Onegin still is slumbering deeply.
 Onegin's waiting on the ground.''
 Olga is there, he sees her stand
 Olga's no life in her regard:
 Only Tatyana does not sleep,
 On this we'll part; goodbye again!
 On whom alone can we depend?
 oh, &agrave; propos: Larin's a dear
 on a small table's oilcloth sheen
 of absence on my wandering ways!
 or, after some dull dinner's labour,
 of any Br&eacute;guet: and in passing
 of Bogdan&oacute;vich's11 refrains.
 of blind Fortuna and of men
 on ballroom's looking-glass parquet
 of chalk the window-panes have taken.
 of childish pranks: a chilled reaction
 of calculated slander should,
 once more, at that beloved sight,
 once more he can't await the night;
 on dance-floor, at breakup of ball,
 old prejudice; all men are zeros,
 odd volumes from the devil's shelf,
 one finds in war amusing sport,
 one leads the multitude in thought,
 one raves in verse like me, and one
 one sees a duck and aims his gun,
 of entertaining the half-dead:
 of Eugene, cold as all creation,
 one wallows in delicious weeping;
 on Eugene's lips. In his dejection,
 one customary grief each hour!
 Only from Tanya's heart, no cheering --
 one customary object gleaming,
 or else a novel.'' ``And my daughter
 over the business of leave-taking,
 over the Petersburg pav&eacute; --
 open the window, sit down near.''
 over the waters in a sweep;
 on features known, but to that dreary,
 o fields - to you I'm vowed at heart.
 ``Oh nurse, a favour, a petition...''
 of fallen glory. Well! don't wait,
 of finishing its book, but early
 or for a lamentable manic,
 or for that Demon4 of my dream.
 of fate, and life, each in its turn
 of grammar, Russian language too.
 of gossip, and set comment humming
 Onegin too. ``Good Lord, at last!''
 on Finland's coast a lonely rover --
 on foot, by seven o'clock, until
 Onegin turns, and with a shiver
 of five more steps they went, slow-gaited,
 or Freisch&uuml;tz as it might be played
 of Gulnare, he would play a card
 Oh, this could all be false and vain,
 of goblets, tall and slender pretties;
 or half-unwittingly preferred
 of human friendship, holy men,
 of hope sometimes disturbs my heart;
 of her own horses, not the post,
 on her smug face a flush of pleasure.
 others will follow where they tread...
 of his intent; and a reaction
 Onegin, my good friend, was littered
 Onegin swiftly came to know
 Onegin sits at table too,
 ``One winter's worth, you've surely got;
 Oh God, what did he think!'' A dream
 Olga's adorer comes a-wooing.
 Olga's appeared upon the scene,
 ``Olga,'' she thinks, ``what fate befell her?
 Oh, I've no strength... I'm tired, my chest...
 of inexperience would have passed,
 or if himself, with rage arousing,
 Oak-floored, and simple as a stable:
 ``Oh nyanya, nyanya, I don't question...
 ``Oh nurse, I'm sad, I'm sad, I'm shaken,
 Our love is what they most abhor;
 On the seashore, with storm impending,
 Often she halts against her will,
 Oh, when, and to what desert banished,
 oh! her young dove, the natural hearer
 of his Och&aacute;kov7 decoration!
 of innocence: a lily blooming
 of its unvarnished monochrome.
 of jealous girls, devote its strain?
 of jealousy has made her start,
 of jealousy, to seem to tremble
 objective of his thoughts and joys:
 or joined us poets. His conversion
 on jam, and speeches in regard
 or just grammatical mistakes,
 on kennels, and on kith and kin,
 of kindling smiles in ladies' eyes.
 or kiss the border of her dress.
 of leaves that autumn killed for good,
 only by rule, and strict tradition
 of ladies and of freakish fops.
 of ladies' heads, and ladies' feet;
 of life's repast betimes, nor sought
 of light that flowering fields reflected:
 only in January the snow,
 or languid bosoms; and no visit
 of language which, so long ago,
 on liquor, and on hay brought in,
 of listening like a judge-supreme
 only the pallor of heart-breaking
 or letters in a young girl's hand.
 only to Eugene showed their worth;
 of lovelorn girls was nothing new?
 oblivion of life's stormy ways,
 of love's anxiety. Blessed is he
 of love so timorous and gentle.
 on me, all this has no effect:
 of Muses' offspring; sitting down
 of mocking turn, or else a breeder
 of Moscow in the mournful days
 of modish belles the modish foe,
 on modish malice, coarse of grain
 or make men seriously discuss
 of many distant lands he sang
 of mind got clarity new-found;
 of moralistical persuasion,
 on most occasions between friends,
 or mother; and in all the play
 on my untimely urn be weeping,
 of Morpheus had induced relief
 or novelties from fashion's page.
 of Neva's proud imperial water,
 of neighbouring owners of the earth --
 of old-lime hospitality.
 of Olga: love's that kind of bore!
 (on orders which of course presume
 of one sole thought holds him in keeping
 of other's thought - a splendid goal;
 on Olga; from heart's ache still spared,
 of oligarchical converse,
 or of Ist&oacute;mina, my sweet,
 of our first meeting face to face,
 or on the granite of the bay.
 of plains where boredom reigns complete,
 oppressed by emptiness of soul,
 oppressed her like a heavy dream.
 of prejudice that's never been
 of philosophic brains, about
 of philosophic isolation,
 on points that all long since agree --
 or pining, Olga's hours were brief.
 or pine, persuade of yes or no,
 of perfect bliss in you. Enough!
 of passion's out, and its whole manner
 of pity for my wretched state,
 of pity: in his silent bow,
 ``oh, quit your stale, your tedious quacking,
 or quizzing-glasses of know-alls
 our disposition being invented
 ourselves on our landfall. It's true,
 our modern Russia's plague and bane.
 Or, as by Lethe's bank he slumbered,
 Or from all notion of enjoyment
 Olinka and her mother sent:
 our Mother Eve: we're never falling
 our terror is their consolation.
 of Richardson and of Rousseau.
 our vessel's long been overdue.
 on Richardson gone raving mad.
 Onegin wastes, you'd almost find
 of recompense beyond endurance,
 our deep economist had got
 our friend Kat&eacute;nin8 brought to bear
 Or, in your lonely homestead, moping,
 of rugs, and carpets' rich refinement.
 On the first sheet you'll find a question:
 of raging passion's surge and roll
 our hapless Tanya! An emotion
 our joy in you is warmly taken.
 our kin are folk whom by profession
 Onegin was assessed by many
 Only the estate provides a setting
 our lives were flat, and what had fired
 our native speech had never sprung
 Often of course you'll have inspected
 of ranks and ages so diverse.
 our troikas effortlessly dashing,
 of ruts that grace our fatherland.
 Onegin has outrun us all.
 of Russian verse, its force in action, --
 Onegin's Letter to Tatyana
 O flowers, and love, and rustic leisure,
 Only the ode, that solemn story!
 On such indifference, such forgetting
 Or, unconsoled by the returning
 ours was no Grandison - not he.
 or Russia's chondria, for short;
 on state affairs; there was a wit,
 Onegin's life, you see, was holy;
 of swaddling clothes - already blighted!
 on stage are thumping without cease;
 of social buzz and modish riot,
 of sudden brightness... it's too curious...
 or, sweeter, like a butterfly
 of sighs, and compliments, and fire;
 of something vague, some misty clime;
 Our evanescent northern summer
 of secret pain... but it's now rated
 of secrets, like a friend but dearer,
 of seeing the world? what on earth could be better?''
 of spires and belfries, in a cup
 or stirring annalistic must;
 of solitude, and peace abiding!
 or simply bow: within her being
 of simple product supplements it.
 or seminarist in yellow shawl!
 or something tenderer still, for you.
 of sumptuous flowers and luscious fruit.
 Onegin knew enough to savour
 or some vile agent of perdition
 of sense and judgement. For his part
 of sunlight makes it flash and crumble,
 of swooning, Tanya nearly dies;
 or servants waiting on her pleasure.
 O spring! o time for love! how sadly
 of spring he lives, he's energetic;
 on springtime grasses of the field,
 onset of the incipient yawn,
 of Twelfth Night's chillest, iciest air.
 of traveller's tedium at its peak:
 on tragedy; but it's no joke,
 of that old duellistic fox,
 of tears will cloud her tender gaze.
 on the cotillion, as amends.
 on the highroad the wolves come out;
 of the most harmless, hopeless trash.
 of the old Tatyana. Eugene tried
 of Tanya's image... Ah, how great
 of the cotillion's endless theme
 on the dull life that bachelors lead;
 of the dull shores of my disfavour,
 of their society turned her savage,
 of the Terpsichorean foot.
 of the two girls; their premonition
 of the whole world, her nurse alone,
 outside and in they star the night;
 outside the house. But you'll be aching
 outside, the scarlet rays of dawning
 of this our novel we reported,
 on this unstable life, my friends!
 of tales of girls, and ghosts, and lore:
 of time between the wolf and dog.)
 of tempests, in what raging ocean
 out of the hand of that same bard:
 out of this world will crowd us too.
 onto the porch, and fussed about
 of trumpet, dagger, mask and sword,
 of unaffectedly fantastic
 of useful objects that the curious
 on unknown ladies in the tiers;
 of virgin fancy, and again
 on visits to us, and in greeting
 on which a carpet has been spread,
 on which the world is doomed to spin.
 of waiting for the dawn to blush,
 of whispering woods where my Eugene,
 of wild repentance and devotion
 of wandering tribesmen; while the ravage
 or worse, to a soir&eacute;e. Unheard
 of work made him feel sick, and still
 on words of foreign derivation,
 or, with an epigram-surprise,
 on waves of far niente floated,
 of youth, so tender, so intense?
 of your slim prints! though this be treason
 play on the window's frosted lace;
 plagued by her ghastly dream, and tries
 packed from the maids' wing to the hall.
 prepares himself; and then his verse,
 prevailed, and with composure steady
 presses its forebears to the tomb.
 8 Playwrights of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
 pretty maidens, romp away,
 prince, who in that dark-red b&eacute;ret,
 pride's icy calm, the combination
 printed among outmoded airs;
 piled books, and through the pane the sable
 pale transcript of a vivid master,
 pinker than glow of Northern morning,
 pans, mattresses, and trunks, and chairs,
 panes patterned by the finest printer,
 pen, tears, and rhymes, and all the rest?
 punctilious in his cotton cap,
 penates, came to cast an eye
 project in silhouette the tops
 poor girl, to drop into a faint,
 peopled my sleep, and to their theme
 proclaims where ponderous P&uacute;styakov
 people there were he glorified,
 pronouncing through her nose politely
 Public opinion - here's our idol,
 4 Poet and acquaintance of Pushkin.
 Please follow me. And here's the inner
 Pleasant, in spite of its compression,
 profoundly sunk, Tatyana stalked
 Poets, I'll say in this connection,
 perhaps for fame, he was endowed;
 parade before their mocking gaze
 Praskovya re-baptized ``Polina'';
 perfervid language of the bard,
 portfolios nobly illustrated
 perfidious blow to my inside,
 persisted and made no amends.
 Present me, please.'' ``You're joking.'' ``Never.''
 Presently Olga's ringing answer
 pure passion's flame, and in a trice
 Prepared for prophecy and fable,
 past ice-blocks, blue and squared away,
 plunged in reflection's deepest train,
 Prince N. respectfully invites him
 Princess Alina. She was still
 promptly had nothing left to give.
 ``Princess, mon ange!'' ``Pachette!'' ``Alina!''
 perhaps - for flattering hope will linger --
 perhaps her love could in the end
 perhaps, though Phoebus warns, I'll see
 parterres, she runs to rivulet's brink,
 past all endurance. You're referred
 passion's rough language talked by others,
 put a strong staff into my hand,
 puts out the lamps; the whole brigade
 pouted, and swore in furious passion
 paved roads will traverse Russia's length
 Prince Vyazemsky
 poetic in her simple pureness,
 Priam-like agricultural sages,
 Pikht&iacute;n, of the Hussars, was here;
 Proud Albion's lyre is what I follow,
 pointed each year, for time to come,
 Protect me from such apparition
 pursue his pencil. Everywhere
 Poor Lensky! Set aside for weeping,
 Poor Lensky! where the tomb is bounded
 Poor Tanya's bloom begins to languish,
 Perhaps however, to be truthful,
 praised his fierce courage in its day:
 present her languor and distraction
 ``Poor Yorick,'' said he, broken-hearted:
 past the grand ladies, see her glide;
 Perhaps some secret apprehension
 Perhaps to improve the world's condition,
 poetry's sacred frenzy, made
 paled, flushed, or lost composure's grip --
 Perhaps, when thoughts are all a-quiver
 proficiency to speak and write,
 Porcelain and bronzes on the table,
 perhaps no more sensations lumbered
 parodies winter in the south;
 perpetually, one goal for dreaming,
 Parisian taste invents for one --
 pursue his love - and at one bound
 1 Pushkin first wrote ``imperial portraits''; but this he later altered ``for reasons of censorship'' because, as Nabokov explains, ``tsars were not to be mentioned in so offhand a way''.
 14 Pushkin leaves blank the name of Onegin's model dandy.
 passion and dreams of pensive cast.
 Pistols are out, they gleam, the hammer
 peasants, and fashion-shops, and sledges,
 propped in the door among the press.
 poor Tanya more intensely burns;
 Petrarch
 Petrovsky Castle; and the fame
 poetic dreams, a brighter fire.
 parting with Olga made him think
 parks, monasteries, towers and ledges,
 pursuits of a monotonous breed
 past all the assembly in a whirl,
 Petushk&oacute;v, local Paris, tearing,
 perplexed... and rooted to the ground.
 purport of other lines; intense
 put back the libel on the table
 paterfamilias (unwed),
 pours out its guiltless frank admission,
 ``Qu'&eacute;crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?''
 quite self-absorbed and unaffected
 quickly to O... I mean to that...
 really more bearable to you
 ready to share our quiet leisure
 rebuffed, found instant consolation;
 recalling earlier loves, did we,
 recalling earlier time's romances,
 radiance of Dian, sits in pain
 reduced to sense, not without pain --
 red wine in tumblers to the brim --
 ``r&eacute;veillez-vous, belle endormie.''
 rigorously though you'd inspect --
 right in the flower of joyous hope,
 raised a dull eye to moon's refulgence,
 reluctant to exhaust the boy,
 relined and strengthened for the drive;
 relations off, and never spoke.
 rumours and threats and premonitions,
 ranges, Lenora2-like, she'd ride
 ran through the fields, sheer panic fright
 Reader, I wish that, as we parted --
 Reader, the elder sister now
 Reader, whatever fate's direction,
 resigned himself to prison's ties,
 Riding on the lugubrious prairie?
 Reflection was her friend and pleasure
 19 Refers to the Circassian girl in Pushkin's poem The Caucasian Prisoner.
 round Tanya congregate the misses,
 Rage died, and jealousy's obsession,
 Right at the outset of my story
 retired, forgotten by his brothers,
 Relations. No-one else at all.
 reap a brief harvest on their furrows;
 reader, by painting you a scene
 roamed the still forest like a ranger,
 reader, you ask, and I'll expound --
 regard, and slipped away for good, ...
 runs after what is sweet, and vain.
 rings proudly in that sombre name.
 roofs, flowerbeds, fences, all in white,
 ripen, and find a new expression --
 rapture was just two weeks ahead;
 Rousseau (forgive a short distraction)
 reader, or where you've shone and glittered!
 reader, we must be separating,
 recall, by its bewitching cup,
 reflection or provoked dispute:
 right from the cradle of her days;
 raised nose and shoulders high and wide
 remains unmoved: still he's persistent,
 rendered them tedious to each other;
 repeats what her mama has taught.
 replies: ``We might as well.'' They walk
 rushed to Anisia's room, to plunder
 Remember the retort satiric!
 respect, and mercy for my dreaming.
 Revenge's hour is near, and after
 resigned disposal of your fate.
 retired, as he, from fashion's stream,
 reverie hounds you, and you find
 Russia's old glories and their gleams,
 roses romantically blowing;
 Risen with earliest rays of dawning,
 rewards the music of your mind
 11 Russian poet and translator from the French.
 Russian pancakes were always served;
 Russia's Terpsichore, shall never
 20 River in the Crimea. The reference is to the harem girls in Pushkin's poem The Fountain of Bakhchisarai.
 return an answer, blunt or keen,
 round the dim river sleep; the curtain
 revive it with another shove --
 She's paid the sunrise no attention,
 scarce out of bibs, already fickle,
 Searching the table exegetic
 ``She knows you?'' ``Why, we lived next door.''
 Seeing herself as a creation --
 She sits down by the window-sill.
 seared as by fire, she stopped. Today
 Softly the door is opened, enter
 ``So to strange kinsfolk I was taken...
 scarcely recalled their love, their spite;
 stands in dismay and indecision.
 stands over my poor nurse's tomb.
 stare hard at her before exchanging
 spared her the expense she dreaded most --
 Sign of the urge for domination:
 Since then Martin Zad&eacute;ka's spell
 Since when is this?'' ``Two years or more.''
 So to his wife for presentation
 slave of the service, was en route.
 Shade-like, in purposeless obsession
 6 Slavonic god of love.
 7 Stanzas XXXVII, XXXVIII and XLIII were discarded by Pushkin.
 Such feckless passion - as I live,
 Such were a young rake's meditations --
 She folds the page, lays down the plume.,
 1 ``See First Snow, a poem by Prince Vyazemsky.'' Pushkin's note. For Prince P. Vyazemsky (1791--1878), poet, critic and close friend of Pushkin, see also Chapter Seven, XLIX.
 She hates a friendly voice's sound,
 She'll not see him, her obligation
 She loved the balcony, the session
 Seeing Vladimir had defected,
 She's here, she spreads abroad; she stipples
 She struck one as the incarnation --
 She sits with Nina8 at a table --
 2 ``See the descriptions of the Finnish winter in Baratynsky's Eda''. Pushkin's note.
 She went - and Eugene, all emotion,
 She was alone, lit by the moon.
 So glut yourselves until you're sated
 Schiller and Goethe had refined him,
 Shishkov,6 forgive me: I don't know
 So Lensky wrote, obscurely, limply
 So, like Childe Harold, glum, unpleasing,
 ``So let it be! for you to keep
 Semy&oacute;n Petr&oacute;vich, mean and glum,
 Sometimes a landscape's represented,
 Sometimes his tricks would earn him trouble,
 So my Zaretsky, as I said,
 Since dawn, whole families have been driving
 Sunk in dejection, she won't hear
 Sbogar,8 mysterious through and through,
 Shot through below the chest - and streaming
 Street lamps go flashing by, and stalls,
 ``Sit down! how strange! it's like the stage
 So there she stood, forlorn, deserted!
 So you, inspired Yaz&yacute;kov,4 sobbing
 sharing her in promiscuous fashion,
 6 Stanza discarded by Pushkin, also stanza XXXVIII.
 1 Stanza left incomplete by Pushkin.
 2 Stanzas IX, XIII, XIV, XXXIX, XL and XLI were omitted by Pushkin.
 2 Stanzas VIII and IX and XXXIX were discarded by Pushkin.
 shall my sad gaze no more alight
 Shall I depict with expert knowledge
 1 Stanzas I to VI were discarded by Pushkin.
 2 Stanzas XV, XVI and XXXVIII were discarded by Pushkin.
 Suddenly, from a crest, she sighted
 So down came Tanya, hardly daring
 3 See Chapter Three, note 13.
 She dreamt of portents. In her dreaming
 She dropped... ``It's he! Eugene arriving!
 She enjoys the stately orchestration
 She entered the deserted yard.
 She faced him, questioning: ``But you?...''
 She hesitates, and doubts beset her:
 She looked across, felt in her heart
 shall I see you?'' As Tanya speaks
 She looks: forgotten past all chalking
 swaying the artless, waiting on
 4 See note 1 to Chapter Five.
 She's dropped her sash's silken billow;
 She's fallen in the snow - alertly
 She's in the wood, the bear still trails her.
 ``She's not in love?'' ``There's no one, ever.
 3 ``Sweet-sounding Greek names like Agathon... etc., are only current in Russia among the common people.'' Pushkin's note.
 She was like him and always sported
 Smiling through sleep, nature is meeting
 shall make my story grim as hell;
 Still blazing with resentment's fuel,
 Still for ever, fare thee well.
 Still on the board, the beakers hissed,
 So let me with a kind expression
 Some days he's still in bed, and drowses,
 Some neighbours there have come together;
 Since earliest boyhood he had doted
 So now be off to Neva's brink,
 Spoilt by the habit of indulgence,
 Should your perfections be expended
 Straight up the chimney, pipes were smoking.
 Strike the ditty up, my sweets,
 4 Serfs chosen as recruits for the army had their forelock cut off.
 So she was called Tatyana. Truly
 stalking the momentary weakness,
 scarlet with passion's instant flaring,
 So the poor butterfly will quiver
 5 Satiric poem by Ivan Dimitriev, 1795. The reference is - summarizing very briefly - to a controversy between different literary cliques about the relative merits of the classic ode and the romantic elegy.
 Shy as a savage, silent, tearful,
 shall not attack my lily's root;
 So, verse and prose, they came together.
 So went his sermon. Almost dying,
 so all went smoothly after that.
 shadows that flit behind the glazing
 seacoast, to hear in dark of night
 swam on the river's dreaming face,
 swapped it for odd tomes of Malvina,
 sharpness of wit, and social art,
 stays fixed and focused on a vision
 so a storm-shadow wraps away
 started a life of pointless roaming,
 startling the ingenuous with a jest,
 so brilliantly he'd hoax the fools,
 such careless language of surrender?
 secretly overheard by you.
 She's dressed since dawn, dead pale; debating,
 such crystalled scents as best are able
 secret sledge-rides in verse of fire;
 sacred to children of Apollo!
 So a disabled soldier-man,
 ``She's mine!'' Evgeny's voice of thunder
 such frank tendresse; away they stole
 Still as he was? has he stopped prancing?
 so, cursing women's devious course,
 sickroom attendance night and day
 such rustic cunning can't be wrong!) --
 Still in the porch, exhausted-stupid,
 such good and sensible advice;
 such is the usual country cooking;
 secure a secret assignation,
 so circumspect, and so punctilious,
 such shadowy and leisured ways,
 suddenly lowering eyes that languish,
 ``She was the one who looked as still
 sadly he mourned for the departed.
 she appears before him, grim and frozen.
 Still tumbling, devil, snake and Cupid
 she brought her talents, never ceased,
 she burst into a coughing-bout.
 she can't; and in her panic hurry
 She wanders on without direction.
 Saint Petersburg's fine flower was there --
 Silence was everywhere enthralling;
 such stubborn brain, and vivid will,
 secluded vales, where swans were crying,
 sed alia tempora! The devil
 sad meditations in her look,
 she blossomed in the graceful ways
 she calls down curses on their leisure,
 she can't escape at any pace --
 she can't; Evgeny's pushed the portal,
 she can't make out a single fraction
 she'd cheer my wordless way, and do
 she did what nurse advised she do
 she doesn't see, or doesn't mind;
 she drinks it like a priceless potion;
 spends light and darkness in the dreary
 she'd never join the game selected,
 she'd never tell them news or scandal
 she flails around, she tries to shout --
 she flies as fast as she can go;
 she flies no more, she's lost her strength.
 she fell in love - the hour was fated...
 she fell in love with all the fancies
 she finds, in order alphabetic:
 she finds in river and in hill.
 she finds it stifling here... she strains
 so effortlessly can disarm.
 she found Evgeny, eyes a-glitter,
 she found, in labours and in leisure,
 she guards, in silence and for good,
 she grew accustomed, and contented.
 sledges, and tardy dawns together
 she holds a letter up, and leaning
 she lacked her sister's beauty, lacked
 she looks, the room is getting light --
 she'll spin this way and that, and beat
 she lost the language of the gods
 she loved the steppe-land and its singing,
 she lowers darkened eyes, unwitting,
 she never even bit her lip.
 she never joined, or skipped, but rather
 she never read a Russian paper,
 she once had pined in girlish grief,
 she peers discreetly through a chink
 sleep much, read little, and put down
 sleep runs from her, she turns and turns...
 she quite forgot - began to call
 she roams the empty garden-plot...
 she speeds her footsteps to a race,
 she sees it all. The simple maiden,
 she sighed, and in a trance coopted
 she spins and, friend of winter nights,
 she's nearly swooned, she's suffocating;
 she sang of childhood's fun, indited
 she stopped at the loud torrent's bound,
 she sits down calmly on one side,
 she's their great friend, asked in, caressed,
 she's turned up in my garden, bringing
 she sat there; through her teeth a word
 she sits with head sunk on her breast,
 she's up and flying through the air
 she saw no friendly figure starting
 sweet as a lover's kiss, and dear,
 spectacled age divines as well,
 she trembles, and with fever drumming
 she treads our earth, and how her breast
 spelt hazard, ruin and disaster;
 sweet old tradition was preserved:
 shelter for trysts at every turning;
 sweet talk with friends. How many days
 sweet words by which her pain was banned --
 she visited the humble tents
 she walked across a snowy plain
 she walked, but just as she was turning
 she went inside the empty shell
 she won't inhale the powdered rime,
 she wrote in French... what a confession!
 she was unhurried, unobtrusive,
 see with their jugs the milk-girls go
 she yields to it without condition
 so, full of heart-felt tribulation,
 so fires of spring will bring to birth
 sigh, and stood up, began to pace;
 suggests a victim richly decked...
 so gloriously he'd fool the clever,
 so heartless and so detrimental,
 smiles, and a maiden's tranquil poise,
 shine out and bring the world to bliss. &gt;2
 smile, voice and movements, little waist --
 stiffening as the hours go by,
 spirit that anguish had made ill.
 still as a shadow, grim and bitter;
 still after many years in place.
 still captivated his young soul.
 still coughing, hissing, clapping, champing;
 still dim, through crystal's magic glass,
 still everywhere the lamps are bright;
 still eats and drinks enough for two.
 still filled with Eugene, Tanya wrote,
 still hardly opened up, from fading.''
 still has Monsieur Finemouche for friend,
 still made of tulle, the self-same bonnet
 still meek, still deaf as howd'youdo,
 still powdered is Luk&eacute;rya Lvovna,
 still shivering in the bitter weather
 stirred at your gaze, so strange, so gleaming,
 swiftly decayed beyond recall
 so it was not in any measure,
 so, if we want to change, we can!
 silver with moonlight, in her dreaming
 solemn, too long compelled to throttle
 so long as they're employed in song:
 self-portraits only - furthermore
 solitude, stillness and the night,
 self-willed it may be just the same;
 so Lensky answered the old dear:
 ``some are far distant, some are dead''.
 so much, I'm left no time to speak!
 some disagreeable remarks.
 some future dunce will point a finger
 somehow have got the designation
 summits of aspen, birch and lime,
 some ladies preach from Say and Bentham,
 simple old lady; but the liquor --
 some minutes long. The words won't fit
 some nonsense thrown up while carousing,
 someone like you and me, just nice?
 someone towards whose heart and mind
 some other, older spring will gleam,
 summons his people. On the sleigh
 same Pom, same husband to the end;
 some regimental bard has added
 some splendid lady is referring
 something like spleen, that scourge of Britain,
 something to fritter and to burn,
 something to rack his brains about,
 sometimes from a fair, black-eyed maiden
 sometimes he'd fall into a trap
 sometimes, in reverie's sacred land,
 sometimes the evening brought together
 some vote a doctor for the case,
 so nearly had them in his power.
 sing about something else at last!''
 sent at the Colonel's own behest.
 since I'm a member of the same.
 since I stopped sinning years ago.
 since then my heart was wrenched aside;
 since, through the mist that dreams arise on,
 sang for the guests above the wine;
 sing God knows whom, compose with art
 sentiment, notebook, verses, all
 singing in chorus as directed
 sensitive ladies of all ages --
 song, laughter, whistle, bark and champ,
 sings as he plaits a humble shoe.
 send them good wishes through the mail
 sent to seduce? Resolve my doubt.
 soon a great truth came to enfold her
 soon all that went without a wrench:
 stood in the door, cherubic, mute,
 stood thunder-struck. In what wild round
 showed one a pattern of perfection
 sooner or later will relate
 spoke words of hope? But who are you:
 soon, infidelity proved cloying,
 shocked by their modish pride, and fleeing
 should have been analysed when caught,
 show me the sense. Divine decree
 shows freedom's advocate, that strong
 shows up through trees, all of a grovel
 smoothe his way out with humour's ointment.
 shortened, or lengthened off the page.
 so often from her Moscow cousin
 so pious, and so clever too,
 so pure, so spotless through and through,
 sequence of dinners stretch away,
 spread out its shadow all around --
 servant of God, and Brigadier.''
 struck down as if she'd been accused,
 struck for Evgeny, with its play
 screened by a hill from storm's intrusion,
 sorceress-winter's here at last.
 straightened his wig, and asked her name.
 straight to his stall, then turns his glasses
 stripping my soul before your eyes!
 surer than friendship or than kin,
 stretched on a sofa, calls to greet them.
 so sketchily possessed by each,
 so, seeing there no rhyme or reason,
 suspecting wonders would come out.
 so that all three went off to lunch,
 sets a sonorous cadence rolling --
 sits imperturbable, and free.
 sit on a flimsy bench, and lays
 set off our troubled mind comparing
 set off the ladies like a frame.
 sets out upon her homeward course;
 sits there beside the window-sill!
 set the guests smiling at his arch,
 sets the wise traveller cavorting
 set to well-known children's glee:
 sits with Limburg's vivacious cheese
 stumblingly call to mind he did
 slumber still floats above his head.
 squeezes her hand - and brings to flower
 stuff of the poet's hallowed dreams!
 so unforgiving a report?
 sought in her book, that text of danger
 spurs of Chevalier Gardes are clinking,
 shutters are opened and the soft
 shutters are up, and all is pale
 study where he would sleep and feast
 so virtuous that, no sooner seen,
 saw through the window, morning-bright,
 spying my features, as he could,
 says the old lady in a croak:
 that even so my wretched style
 that he's not honest past all question.''
 ``The one you love's the younger daughter?''
 that alien scene must I now turn
 that all of Russia can't contribute
 that corps of social legislation --
 that fiery souls' headstrong enthusing
 that king of the satiric scene,
 thank you for suffering and its joys,
 thank you for sorrow and for pleasure,
 thank you indeed. Alike in sorrow
 to all the most adored actrices,
 that lives, and glitters, and endears,
 to aim, at steady, even pace
 that mediocre dress alone
 that one be shot just anyhow --
 that on the world's staircase there waited
 that raves with poetry can ever
 that she's ``ideal'', begins preparing
 that spring with me has had its fill
 that's the morass, I beg you note,
 that soul without a moral tie,
 that's where my years of youth were spent.
 The arbitrary rules of passion
 that we enjoy equating chatter
 that world where every man's a critic
 that with him to the trysting-place
 The kinsfolk in concerted action
 that table where the lamp has languished,
 that there his friend Kav&eacute;rin's5 waiting;
 that wit embarrasses the dull;
 to bee and butterfly unknown.
 to bring across Lepage's4 mortal
 to boom, to flash across the sky,
 to come back to the hall alone
 to captivate, and then to fly.
 to catch the eye and to attract.
 to draw a breath, around her staring
 to dreaming given up unduly,
 to drive the swooning senses mad;
 to drop all that old-fashioned mumming;
 to drown the hiss of modish wives.
 to do them all is easy game.
 the audience still is busy stamping,
 they all have richly earned a pension;''
 they all still keep their old impress:
 the atmosphere of youth and madness,
 the answer's past all human viewing,
 the abstracted poet would bring forth
 then afterwards, alone, at ease,
 the altar flame's extinguished now.
 the branches of the oak with flock;
 the blaze of candles, and the trembly
 the beauties in their flimsy dresses,
 the brilliant crackpot: this reaction
 the bliss that fills me when your throbbing,
 the ballroom drove me off my head:
 the bank, the immobile stream are levelled
 the blood came smoking from the wound.
 the blood within my withered heart,
 the bloom has withered on the bough;
 the books then underwent inspection...
 the barbs that envy's always spreading,
 the boxes; boiling, pit and stalls;
 to each and every raving feast
 the coachmen ring the fire, and curse
 the coach has reached its destination;
 the cabinet behind the door
 the children spoilt, the mad, the rogues
 the child prepares for protocol --
 the crown of marriage was projected
 the cooks prepare the midday meal;
 the carriage of the newly-wed.
 the crush, the glitter and the gladness,
 ``The morning star will soon be shining,
 the country cottages and hovels,
 they don't deserve what they inspire
 the doorway opened wide to meet her,
 the downy woods are greener-tinted;
 there caustic Shakhovsk&oacute;y8 came in
 there Didelot10 crowned himself with glory:
 there never fails a kindly greeting,
 the earth for him grew dumb and closed?...
 the earlier griefs are what I miss.
 the early pealing of the bells
 there's not a word she's understood;
 there, where the coulisse entrance went,
 these words are not of Russian stock:
 there zerov8 shared the unwilling
 the flaming roses of a cheek,
 the foes, cold-blooded and unspeaking,
 the flickering tones of dress and speech,
 they find her somewhat unexpected,
 the frozen corpse, drives off, and homing
 then from his cabinet he'll pass
 the footmen sleep on the pelisses;
 the fools who sparkle far and wide,6
 the first will never find fruition,
 they fluff her curls out in the fashion,
 the grand barouche is on its way.
 the gallery claps - it's bored with waiting --
 the girl's attentive eyes are bent.
 the headpiece-text is thus indited --
 the heart and all its fragile dreams.
 the heartache that they bring lies deep.
 The city's early sounds awake her;
 There came a murmur, for a fleeting
 the horses fidget worse and worse;
 Then, after midday he'll be waking;
 The fields are dark, since evening came.
 the horror of disgrace and crime,
 the infant year with cheerful greeting:
 That point I wouldn't mind contesting,
 Then in return for all this twaddle,
 the inmost thoughts that girls can hide.
 To be a butt for the malicious
 ``The elegy's just vain protesting,
 The jealous poet's gloom is lightened!
 The protocol is all one wishes:
 They will receive us with delight.''
 ``This time I think you've been reduced to
 the heart inside him seemed to shrink;
 then he'd implore a declaration,
 the hat, the scowling brow, the chest
 the household boys in noisy rout;
 Their look, though, shows no change upon it --
 the heart of the professional flirt!
 the hour was late. And now from aching
 the iron figure3 on the table,
 Today... the sad memorial's lonely,
 These figures from the world of seeming,
 The illness with which he'd been smitten
 Their talk, so sound on every matter,
 They've missed Eugene's completed etching.
 5 The week before Lent.
 The world of fashion, prone to flatter,
 This world's so vacuous that it's got
 the impatient conqueror was humbled!
 then in the study's quiet setting,
 the jagged flint's pulled back anew.
 the joys of youth, that festal cup,
 they kill the zest of rhymed composing,
 the keys that opened up the hall.
 the leather rein, to learn the tale,
 the lucky bard, and as he dozed
 the ladies' calculated dress;
 the linen stretched on the tambour.
 the lust for blood drew them apart?
 the level tenor of his going,
 the modish Record Office clerks
 they managed to disperse the pack.
 the man of reverie and reflection,
 the man who laid her brother low.
 the moon in its azure of air.
 the merchant's up, the cabman's walking
 the murmuring Nereids recite,
 they nudged Tatyana, and each muttered
 the needle, never had she lingered
 the nightingale's begun to sing.
 the new ballet he should be at.
 the occupations of the morning.
 the old dame wept her daughter's parting,
 the one who killed the youthful poet?''
 they praise the Father of the world.
 the prejudices of the ages,
 There's powdery snow up to her knees;
 their cloaks; Zaretsky's measured off
 There's vacancies in plenty there.''
 There was - --,10 so notorious
 The fire was dying; cinders faintly
 The Song of the Girls
 The years incline to gloom and prosing,
 their hands are dipped in scarlet gore,
 their journey took them a full week.
 The days flew past; by now the season
 the ring of marriageable girls --
 the swarm, the glittering mob that presses,
 the sad beginnings of his life
 The hearth was low beyond all stoking.
 their looks and language in deceit
 their lords, and thwack their palms together;
 The rustic sage, in that apartment,
 They sing; unmoved by their sweet-sounding
 To harmless idleness devoted,
 their hopes, their pranks, their dreams at night --
 then suddenly she's off, and there
 Thank you for all the gifts I treasure,
 ``The house, the park... I'll go and see!''
 Then Tanya hears of the decision.
 the sumptuous palais shines out;
 ``Today he promised he'd be here,''
 The censor's tribute, I'll arrange:
 The years would pass; no longer youthful,
 To face society's derision
 ``Tell me, our neighbours, are they thriving?
 the safest place for declarations,
 the tears in stream pour down her cheeks.
 they talk of her, of how and whether:
 the towers of whitestone Moscow beaming
 The ch&acirc;teau was of a construction
 the untiring city, where you've given
 There was a period when cold-blooded
 There, with epigrammatic neatness,
 The old dame had no thought of scouring
 The ploughman there delights to doze,
 ``Tell me, what's your companion doing?''
 the poet struck down by his friend!
 the pillars of the turnpike-gate;
 to expose to Moscow fops and Circes
 the potholes make the coach unsteady.
 then quickly something changed all this:
 the quintessential reaction
 the rosy bloom that glowed so newly
 their table, and their hours of leisure?
 they shared their days in deed and heart,
 the stars, the moon - celestial light
 the subtle spouse was just as loyal --
 the secrets of the grave, the pages
 the shepherd, as he used to do,
 the shepherd sings of Volga's fishing
 the simple legend - then a haze
 the snow from all surrounding hills;
 the strangeness of her habitation,
 the spring invites you to the land
 the source's chattering voice is heard;
 the sky is brilliant in its blue
 the skyblue eyes, the flaxen tresses,
 the trail the youthful poet followed
 treaties of nations long departed,
 the thirst for work, the lust for learning,
 the time to go has long since passed
 the two foes stand with eyes downcast.
 the universe is all perfection;
 the valley's dark. The forest lands
 the vales dry out, grow brightly printed;
 That year the season was belated
 To batten down their indignation
 18 ``The author, on his mother's side, is of African descent...'' Pushkin's note.
 The better to dispel her sorrow
 The evening passes, and meanwhile
 the world and all its works, she wept
 ``There, just in front of all that swarm,
 6 These lines and the first twelve lines of stanza XLVII were discarded by Pushkin.
 The Larins kept the old tradition:
 The place where Eugene loathed his leisure
 Then, plunged in the housekeeper's day,
 The tomcat, mannered and affected,
 Then verdicts from her husband's quartet
 the wild rose blooms, and in the covert
 the wilful fancies of the heart.
 the winter's ways are smooth as glass.
 the year, his age, then: ``may your rest,
 The yard was bursting with dependants;
 the young hostess, towards whom each
 the youth of those past days in line
 Then what resulted from the meeting?
 The World found this enough to treat
 the youthful votary of rhyme
 The aunts exchanged a look, they fluttered,
 to feasts and fun this winter past;
 to heart. And in his misted gaze
 to hear what latest modes require,
 this angel, this proud devil, tell,
 this denizen of the coulisses
 to infuriate a clumsy foe;
 thickly the exclamations fly.
 twin lamps of serried coup&eacute;s throw
 twirls the other slowly as she pleases,
 this soul that glowed with virgin fire.
 to it the people's blessing never
 take any novel, clearly traced
 take leave of my lightheaded youth!
 taken your place, though not your throne?
 to know the audience hears his voice.
 to kiss Armida's lips, or seek
 to kissing or caressing father
 take wing on spite; that serious men
 to Moscow settled in a trice.
 There many pages keep the impression
 to face him now I feel too frail...
 to her flower-garden, to her novels, --
 Then gradually upon sensation,
 to hear him howl: ``that's me!'' You'll get
 thinking: he loved me, and in strife
 The manor house, in deep seclusion,
 ``The peasants there have wealth abounding,
 thirty-two steps with great precision,
 to lift his pistol up. A span
 till Moscow, meekly on its knees,
 The sky is clear, the earth is frozen;
 to fresh grandparents every day.
 to gentlemen on every side
 to happen long ago, dear readers,
 tribute of tears, applause's shrilling,
 takes up an hour or two; at last
 to liven with a silk atour
 Take Olga's shoulders now - the beauty!
 to lie down at her feet like slaves!
 time was, in evening hours of leisure,
 Today a mental fog enwraps us,
 to Olga's face, he whispered low
 That isn't our immediate worry:
 those walks amid the gloom and calm
 The banquet's given no cause for sneezing,
 though I'll come back to him, yet clearly
 too long he's hoaxed us high and low...''
 to pass for an affected freak,
 The comrade of so many days,
 to roar of banquets, din of brawling,
 to the empty homestead made her way,
 to where he came to her that time
 The clock of doom had struck as fated;
 though there he's no more to be found,
 though what's romantic here I simply
 two or three novels where our later
 Then, crying, they untwined my plait,
 terse words or crosses in the book,
 to spoil loose paper by the ream;
 to the complacent and the null;
 thumps as the balls are pressed inside
 The crush, the heat, as music blares,
 The darkness thins away; but still
 These days I'm finding even gladness,
 There once I too strolled back and forth:
 There too, he honoured, hotly weeping,
 The house is packed out; scintillating,
 The invalid's glad salutation,
 4 This Russianized version of the Greek Agatho is ``elephantine and rustic to the Russian ear''. Nabokov. See note 3 to Chapter Two.
 time was when morning's breeze was swaying
 though cold I am and sad; in sleep
 though he's unknown, there's no suggestion
 though years ago I used to look
 Then with a half-ethereal splendour,
 too pale, too thin, but on the whole
 three carts - traditional procession --
 There was a pine-branch downward straying
 The flirt has reason's cool volition;
 two pines have tangled at the root;
 three pairs of handsome ones - yet there
 torment of pride? And why's he come?
 to see life as a ritual play,
 There sings the nightingale, spring's lover,
 ``The Lord God be with you, my daughter!''
 The two old ladies kiss and cry;
 This wearisome perambulation
 to see the grave, and shed a tear.
 They take her too to the Assembly.
 ``This is Vladimir Lensky's grave
 to smother her dear feet with kissing.
 to the first meanings of his flute.
 The olden days, I want to hear...''
 The sky breathed autumn, time was flowing,
 to which so oft we've dedicated
 towards his stall, the pedlar's hawking;
 That's when I'll sit down to compose
 Today it's turn and turn about.
 The bearded outrider is sitting
 The book displayed, not so you'd know it,
 The bitterness was mine - the ice
 They buzz - but then all talk's suspended --
 The choirs of dancers sought their quarters.
 toward the neighbouring valley's river.
 Then doors are opened, Lensky enters,
 There's din of parting now that rages,
 towards the simple urn beneath;
 There you're entirely sure of finding
 The hall is full of noise and hustle,
 The happiness of youth is dead,
 The horses, as they sense the dead,
 ``Then, in the backwoods, far from rumour
 The lady of the house has fled.
 They laugh. The guests begin arriving.
 ``The man's a boor; his brain is missing,
 The night has many stars that glitter,
 The north wind blows, the clouds are driving --
 The nervous-tragical reaction,
 Then our Automedons are flashing,
 The poet's dead... already though
 The princess, sitting peaked and wan,
 They're settled in; and crawling, sliding,
 ``Then send your grandson with this letter
 They should be forced to read in Russian,
 The storm is over,5 dawn is paling,
 The vote was passed without demur.
 This dear, still world I must forswear
 Tsimlyansky wine, between the meat
 Triquet, ingenious poet, dares
 to wave farewell the household waits
 Triquet sings, out of tune. Loud clapping
 This work of the profoundest learning
 To live, it hurries, and to feel it hastes.
 that could sustain it? Only grimness;
 that fills him and in which he lives.
 that, for all this, my shame's report
 that generations of new beauties,
 than households where the wife must moan
 that inexperience leads to grief.''
 tradition still keeps my respect.
 that in the usual Christmas scrimmage
 tracked him, and put him in duress,
 that, like proud Byron, I can draw
 to all this tattle, yet at heart
 Tanya (profoundly Russian being,
 that ardent youth entirely lacks;
 that, artless, and without concealing,
 that fell, and then began to shiver,
 that from the backdoor he'd be leaving
 that fired his soul, to burn the same;
 that I'm just longing to indite --
 that I prefer to Champagne's tide;
 to ask of you that you transcend
 that languid beauty, listens nicely --
 to all that's trivial and inane?
 that, meanwhile, pinched and glum of feature,
 Through the tight ranks - aristocratic,
 Tatyana in low-cut attire
 that modish rings were still a-buying.
 than most. Evgeny, though he knew
 that night, in secret, set for two;
 that not a syllable be uttered
 that once I spent my happiest days?
 that poison brew; and in your mind
 that queen of secrets and of sighing.
 tranquillity, and solitude --
 that she's so trustful, and imbued
 Tatyana looks with pulses racing
 that self-same evening where he'd go.
 that somehow that same day we'll meet...
 that strikes him with such force and meaning?
 that stretched from Romulus in his prime
 that sat above the stove and purred
 that's the refrain that you should sing,
 that there be just one voice which came,
 than this humiliating passion
 that this of all things for a swain
 that thievish mouths cannot consume
 that verse will turn to useful duties;
 that virgin dream and its confession
 that visitors must be expected.
 than what our sorrowing rhymesters do?
 that was less clever still by half.
 that youthful soul, which pined for sadness;
 to A&yuml;'s vintage in the sequel
 that your proud glance is sure to take!
 to burn - and then by force of reason
 to be respected all through life:
 to be the bride I'd call my own.
 to battle further with my passion;
 to clasp your knees, and at your feet
 to cool my glances and my tongue,
 to drain its beaker down, nor thought
 the album of a country miss
 the ardent author of the past
 the all&eacute;e to the lake, the copse;
 the branches all are weighted down
 the bear explains: ``my cousin's here --
 to Eugene's letter, word for word.
 the bear has raised her in his paws;
 the bear let out a roar, and held
 the bear - what next? - behind her stalked.
 the big room, further, not a cat.
 they buried Uncle, congregated
 the boring wives, the ill-bred men,
 the charge that poets are unable
 the charm of what was grave and plain.
 the clamorous honking geese began
 the climacteric of our life,
 the clink of rowels, met his hearing;
 the cold perfection of the sky,
 the cunning prisoner can quite well
 the coolness of the sombre glade,
 to encase herself inside a layer
 the country's pretty stupid here!
 the Corsair, or the Wandering Jew.
 then, country evening fast arriving,
 the draught whose blessings are agreed,
 then dress...
 the driver sits and cuts a dash
 they'd just enrage it with their dart.
 the darling objects - don't you know it? --
 the darling sex is light as down.
 they'd settled that some years before.
 tread the calm, settled path they've chosen...
 the days grew shorter, in the glade
 the days that doom has measured out.
 there any friend of harmless pleasure
 the elegy, grown paralytic,
 there gathered at the coffin-side
 the enjoyment of a friendly drink,
 the expanse of fields, so wide, so lonely,
 there's a small window shining in it,
 the easier they become to charm,
 there's far too much of contradiction,
 there's no absurdity as such,
 there's no ignoble tale that seems
 there's nothing can employ her anguish,
 the entire story of your fate.
 there was a general furtive chatter,
 the fear and rage with which I foam!
 the fleeting works of my creation,
 the full fruit of her heart's desire;
 the funeral monument explains:
 the flower-like pallor of the maiden,
 then from the Muse there came revival:
 the foreign words a maiden's passion
 the fateful diet; by depression
 the guardian angel of tradition,
 the grand monde finds it out of place.
 the glare, the fumes in which I live,
 the grey-haired nurse with kerchiefed head;
 the guests are feasted, good and hearty,
 the gift of recognizing what
 Tanya's no longer quite so frightened
 Tatyana looks, her faintness passes:
 the girl's pale charms, her loosened hair,
 the heavenly lights in glorious quire
 they heap up silver with a spade;
 To private tastes we each subscribe:
 the girls sing out the ancient rhyme:
 then he began to talk once more
 then, help me God, she caterwauls:
 the hall's without a living creature,
 the homely scene, take pleasure in it --
 the hunter in the wood will swear
 the horse gets wind of them and, snorting,
 the herdsman's horn proclaimed the morning
 the hero's name's decided too.
 the hare who from afar has seen
 then I'd have looked for you alone
 the idol that she'll most admire
 the imperturbable princess.
 the jug of bilberry wine is seen.1
 the jams appear in little dishes;
 then know that your reproving finger,
 the kiss where youth and freshness gleam;
 they leave their shores and fly away.
 the lies that in the press run rife,
 the legatee of his relations --
 then liking grew, then every day
 the Lord have mercy on us all!
 the letter from Tatyana's hand:
 then Lensky moved his pawn, and took,
 the letter trembles in her grip;
 the latest fashions of the town;
 the laurel in the old man's crown!
 the lover of Julie Wolmar,3
 the meaning of an epigraph,
 the magic voices of your stream,
 ``the mail explains the time he's taking.''
 the millions of two-legged creation
 the man she feared and idolized --
 the moon; but in the darkened glass
 the murmur where the streamlet played...
 the matchwood chatters as it lights.
 the mountain maiden,19 my ideal,
 the Muses' lofty arts and fashions,
 the marriage plans were all exact
 they met on horseback; quickly they
 they needed kvas like air; at table
 then night comes on; the moon's patrolling
 the nightly luminaries climb.
 Tanya's undressed, and lies in bed.
 the noise their rustic wheels projected --
 Tanya comes to in utter fright...
 the neighbour... you must tell the brat
 the new moon, horned, on her left side,
 the other, jugs of applejack,
 the odious bear still grunts and lumbers.
 the only face to shake and pass
 then on the leaves of recollection,
 then, on the last page, the suggestion:
 the peaceful Muses' devotee,
 the poet's only theme is ``I.''
 the pages of some dull review,
 the pain, the grief, the marrow-freezing
 the pensive Dryads' hiding-ground.
 the pangs with which his heart was troubled,
 the programme of his daily round.
 then quietly at last says she:
 (the reader thinks the rhyme is lilies:
 their breed would (some years after this)
 the Russian N, like N in French;
 the rogue has got a finger frozen:
 their guests, for all they ate and drank,
 their hand to grapple slander's cup,
 their joyous way across the ice;
 their masters' berries undetected
 they rise and ripen and fall dead:
 the rosy sealing-wafer's drying
 their southward flight: one saw approaching
 their tendency to call, and sit.
 the roundest face that you've set eyes on,
 the season which is such a bore --
 the shady wood, the talking stream;
 the sober head, detesting each
 the secret of her husband's measure,
 then sudden fear attacked Tatyana...
 then, stepping nearer, Eugene said:
 the sufferings of tempestuous passion;
 the simple faith of olden days
 the samovar of evening boiled,
 the strophe over which I slaved;
 to ensure that till next time our image
 to eat and drink, then separated
 treated his lessons as a ploy.
 the tighter we can stretch above them
 the third day, wood and hill and grazing
 the talk of guests when they appear;
 the toll of those borne off by fate!
 the tongue of love and of Petrarch.
 the thoughts of my two anchorites.
 the thought of volatile renown.
 the thought sank in, and penetrated:
 they took offence at this, and broke
 then to the altar, to be crowned.
 the total ownership of woods,
 the uncertainties within his heart;
 the units are ourselves alone.
 the unmetric verses of tradition
 the urn of perfumed tea, and tipping
 the utter virtue of their being,
 the usurers' voracious tribe.
 the unworthy husband through depressing
 the vital force gives them the shoot
 they while away the morning's calm.
 the wine-addict adores the cup:
 the world's &eacute;clat, its thunder-roll,
 the war, the snowfall, and his wife.
 the youthful lover once again
 to freedom, softness and enjoyment:
 to garden walks, as arm in arm
 to gasp, and on a bench to sink.
 together they arrived, and none
 to give you honest explanation.
 Tatyana groaned above the tide;
 Tatyana had a changeling look
 to high renown my doleful story,
 Tanya to all her kin. My sorrow
 to help her from the other side;
 to hope that even once a week
 to his mysterious tree the snake
 Tanya is gripped. No comment's made
 to her glass porch; pursues her round
 to his Tatyana, yes, he's racing,
 this Grandison of hers was splendid,
 Tatyana dear, with you I'm weeping:
 this modish whirl, this social story,
 to institute a new regime.
 this very day I'd gladly give,
 to know you, swooned, and in a second
 to life and hope with just a glance --
 till he at last was summoned down
 Two weeks the matchmaker was plying
 till now our language - proud, God knows --
 to look like sad romanticism.
 till then had been dispersed and wasted --
 to meet a black monk, or if crossing
 to meet his thirsty lips... What daze,
 times were when I was sharp and bold:
 times were, when master's least suggestion...''
 too faint to stir a further pace:
 thought, day and night, and thought again
 though we... don't shine in any way,
 took her to his estate, where she,
 thou, my Svetlana!
 two poles that ice had glued like plaster
 two verses of the Aeneid.
 too weak to change, I'm staying vicious,
 to pass the time was Eugene's theme:
 to put on chains for him, and steady
 through distant regions of the heart...
 through gloom and mist; and there came streaming
 through the back porch runs out and flies
 threw Eugene at her feet - she stirred,
 throw meadows into muddy rout,
 to speak; believe me: of my shame
 to see my kin, and in the end
 to save the honour of our land
 to tales that young moustachios tell.
 to Tanya, all's an empty show.
 touches obliquely, but with speed,
 to whisper it her inmost prayer.
 to whom your hearts are dedicated,
 Tatyana hears but takes no part;
 this was our heroes' conversation
 talk that might turn a young girl's head)
 to me her best in-quarto tome,
 to me so simply, with the fires
 two hearts, a torch, and a nosegay;
 too long, against my inclination,
 two sisters who'd received the initial,9
 to play with a dishevelled tress,
 to pine away from passion's thirst,
 to pass for cultured in our ranks.
 through baseness of the soul that he,
 through it they're known to me, and kin.
 to sob out prayer, complaint, confession,
 to sleep some black and empty dreams;
 to stem the bloodstream's wild outburst;
 to sing of others must imply
 to the Larins' had caused a spout
 to talk as if with heart unwrung,
 Tatyana had no dolls to dandle,
 ``this is the one!'' Ah, ever stronger,
 tries out the ice with cautious tread,
 to lift her skirt up; still she's flying,
 tumbled and whirled and twisted quaintly
 to mourn for Russia's gloomy savour,
 to nobody except a wizened
 two cupboards, one divan, a table,
 those monkeys of the good old days:
 those words where love, without condition,
 thoughts of a girl, or as the moon
 to pass the evening. No? then tot
 threats, vows, and simulated fears,
 to rains, and flax, and the stockyard.''
 through heaven's expanse serenely flying,
 to see you, faithfully to follow,
 to the circle of our dance.
 to the hero that she'd adopted.
 to the princess, in his weak hand,
 touches her hand, or throws a fur
 to vice, while virtue got its crown.
 Tatyana, lonely heroine,
 to wreck a maiden's sleep with fable,
 Tatyana, hunted by love's anguish,
 Tatyana listened with vexation
 Tatyana never knew the attraction
 trusted her without hesitation,
 Tatyana now need wait no longer.
 to your loved ones? They do maintain
 ``To...?'' ``Larina.'' ``Tatyana? never!''
 3 ``"Tomcat calls Kit" - a song foretelling marriage.'' Pushkin's note.
 To my astonishment I've seen her,
 ``To me, Onegin, all this glory
 Time races, and she's been forgetting
 To me, unsmiling lips bring terror,
 Time was, he'd been the wittiest ever,
 Tanya begins to understand
 Tanya looks on; her own indictment
 Tanya pursued them with her gaze...
 Tanya's distress had risked detection
 ``Tanya's no child - it's past a joke,''
 Tanya thanks each one with a phrase.
 Tanya today goes hurrying out
 Those friends, those friends! it is, I fear,
 Though belles had lost his adoration,
 Though long since Eugene's disapproval
 Two hearts there are perhaps that keep
 To reading from this odd collection
 Three whole hours, at the least accounting,
 Thronged by adorers, I've detected
 Throughout their life, so calm, so peaceful,
 Tatyana asked. The children all
 Tatyana breathed on the cold pane,
 Tatyana'd rise by candlelight.
 Tatyana flushed, and started shaking.
 Tatyana heard Evgeny out.
 Tatyana, hiding her condition,
 Tatyana in a deep emotion
 Tatyana! it's addressed... to whom?
 Tatyana leaves Onegin kneeling,
 Tatyana lowered her regard
 Tatyana on; Miss Kharlikova,
 Tatyana pined in secret fashion:
 that huge ballrooms vibrated under,
 (that half-pay archivist); and bounding
 thank God, he had no inclination
 that lady the hostess was greeting,
 that moment, of a luscious pie
 that nubile maid of riper age,
 that rogue, backbiter, pantaloon,
 that, though polite, was clear as ice.
 Tatyana sees with trepidation
 Tatyana simply lay in bed,
 that Lensky and Eugene, apart,
 Tatyana watched the moon, and floated
 thank him by curtseying to the dust;
 that marble Nina's proved unable
 Tatyana turned with thirsting soul:
 To whom do you, from all the train
 that lady whose engaging charm
 that Menelaus was quite right --
 that poisonous worm, despised, degrading,
 to a soir&eacute;e. ``My God! to her!...
 that wicked, loose-tongue chatterbox...
 Tatyana, sleepless in the dark,
 Tatyana's here, you know I've brought her...''
 that youthful heart. ``But now at least
 Tatyana's rites are not for me.
 to bellow out: ``she's mine, she's mine.''
 to blow his brains out, but in stead
 to crack between them; for a while
 to comfort her in all her woes,
 to drain, on credit, bottles three.
 to demonstrate some signs of reason:
 they all have swarmed into the hall,
 to Eugene all was new and thrilling;
 the best revenge one could desire.
 there'll be a fight. For that I give
 there waited for us both the malice
 there was no trace to be detected
 the faces met with everywhere;
 to Eugene; nineteen to the dozen,
 to Evgeny. Oh, God, she'd never...
 Tatyana's letter, treasured ever
 Tatyana's love is no by-play,
 the ancients have gone stiff and cold,
 Tatyana's Letter to Onegin
 Tatyana's name day celebration.
 the art he'd studied best of all,
 the bleeding tongues, the tufted tails,
 the crash of plates and knives is blended
 the deeper in the wood, the more
 the eyes of all, the hooves, the snozzles,
 there's crashing, rumbling, pounding, trotting,
 there was a softness in his glance:
 the fleeting tenderness that stole
 the floor serves Triquet for his nap,
 Tatyana shared with full conviction
 Tatyana's haunted by her vision,
 Tatyana3 was her name... I own it,
 the circumstances of his capture
 the eager players are enrolled --
 there's yap of pugs, and laughs, and bustle;
 the friends' salute she never hears
 the festal name day has begun.
 the giddiest hope, carefree and gay,
 the guests squeeze closer to the centres;
 the girl he'd scorned in what he deemed
 Tatyana seeks to attune her ear,
 Tatyana's heart is rent in two.
 Tatyana's husband, now appearing...
 Tatyana struggles to run out --
 Tatyana went with them, and sped
 To talk, to general conversation
 the girl remains there in the gloom
 True, scorn should punish and should bridle
 the highest circles are a bore.
 then he presents her with the scroll.
 the happenings of the previous night;
 the hapless Phrygians all the same,
 the horrid nightmare must portend
 the horns, and the moustachio'd nozzles --
 the hostess cries and, moving fast,
 the indifferent, or the deadly serious!
 the inevitable silly asses,
 the logs; the wild ones have the floor;
 then later slyly he'd revile them
 the moderns rage against the old.
 the modesty of her condition,
 the men confront them, face to face:
 the morning after, a surprise
 the morning light no longer lingers,
 the Major's here: he's all the rage
 the maidens all are slumbering deep.
 the man of honour and of sense.
 the poet's heart found full expression,
 the prince bring up his own relation
 the prince looks at him, and replies:
 the party waits. Seized with an illness
 they're all chained up in different fetters,
 the regimental band is coming,
 they're on the dance-floor, waltzing, spinning.
 they're plunging, whirling, all but squatting.
 the Russian for le comme il faut.
 their unattractive t&ecirc;te-&agrave;-t&ecirc;te;
 the shades of night within their keeping
 the silence when our talk had ceased!
 the solitude of woods and tillage,
 the same as any other day.
 they shove each plate, and every chair,
 the strain of Tasso's octave-rhyme!
 the spring of honour, and the pin
 they sit, they cross themselves for grace.
 the tolerant Evgeny heard --
 the threshold's thronged, wet-nurses call,
 the tusks, the corpse's finger-nails,
 they've moved around and been reseated;
 the whole thieves' kitchen flies asunder,
 they were her only food... and so
 to fashion's absolute dictate,
 to hide a hope, to make a show
 to horror-stories told at night
 to his disputing and his cursing;
 to hit the target: thigh or brain.
 this child of luxury and delight.
 this was the science of that passion
 taken the saucers in their grip,
 to life grew colder than the dead.
 to meet the unhappy poet, skipped
 tomorrow just like yesterday.
 to my young days, it's time I turned
 though Menelaus, in Helen's name,
 though some support it with good grace).
 thought them a pointless peccadillo;
 to pranks and jokes of earlier date.
 to puzzle out with some precision
 to reasoned talk, no dull hearsay,
 to raise the safety catch and strain
 through him is sweetness' self. In grumbling
 throughout the boredom of the hours --
 thrives to this moment, in a station
 to steal away her neighbour's light
 to scorn the men with whom he deals;
 to the beginning of our days.
 to talk of this and that, but then
 to talk to her, but language died.
 to undertake their resurrection,
 to us, though, not exactly new.
 true, with a pistol he could shatter
 to wreak, by stirring Lensky's ire,
 to whom, in a fine flow of preaching,
 towards the Larins' and arriving
 to wiser words and deeds, and learned
 unanimous exchange of looks
 urbane betrayals, and the chilling
 unconsciously he let it mount
 undressed, by candlelight selected
 under the table's linen shield,
 use cunning silence as a screen,
 used in times past to ring a peal
 Uncle, in bed, and near to dying,
 Unforced, as conversation passed,
 Up to the porch our hero's driven:
 unfathomable to the mind;
 unhesitating from her tongue,
 using overt or covert rules.
 unloved, and friendless, and estranged.
 unnoticed, in unseeing style,
 upon her feverish tongue; the slip
 upon her lips the breathing dies,
 upon it, and with head down-bent
 upon the side of the distaff --
 unseen, already you were dear,
 unspeaking, too, but stretched out there
 unswerving friend, correct landowner,
 up the hillside at breakneck pace;
 until Br&eacute;guet's unsleeping chime
 until the dawn beneath her pillow.
 until the grave by your strong hand:
 until the tombstone; there one day
 until this day, a lady's love
 untirable, at sound of drum:
 untouched by envy's bitter smarting,
 untouched by trace of inhibition,
 up your accounts, and raging, toping,
 V
 V
 V
 V
 V
 V
 V
 VI
 VI
 VI
 VI
 VI
 VI
 VI
 Vladimir drops, hand softly sliding
 Vladimir Lensky. Quick, let's dine!
 Vladimir Lensky, whose creator
 Vladimir's challenge found expression
 Vladimir shuts the book, for writing
 Vladimir to this casual mention
 (vain twaddle, fables of the ages,
 villages flickered far and near,
 vexation? vainness? heavens above,
 Vladimir, wealthy and good-looking,
 VII
 VII
 VII
 VII
 VIII
 value the hero of my tale,
 VII
 VII
 VII
 visit the family, what d'you say?
 VIII
 verdicts of vanity the bleak,
 VIII
 vanishes with his load of dread.
 VIII
 VIII
 VIII
 VIII
 (VIII,2 IX,) X
 6 Vintage 1811, the year of the Comet.
 Vesper is met by crow of cock --
 1 Vasily Levshin (1746-1826), writer on gardening and agriculture.
 whatever you may need, just call...
 what flowers of spring display your dint?
 what holds her in profound reflection,
 what odes Vladimir might have written --
 what play will he present this week?
 what's in them? All this loud parading,
 what wings our first successes gave!
 wedlock for us would be abhorrent.
 when Br&eacute;guet's chime is heard proclaiming
 where are distress, commiseration?
 where admonitions are pronounced,
 What sort of roses, in your notion,
 where did that glum eccentric go,
 where dwelt this child of inspiration,
 where every day a bloodstained shade
 where folded arms are tightly pressed.
 where he was master of his college,
 where in the heart of silence rang
 Whatever for caprice of spending
 ``where master used to sit alone.
 where nowadays I'm soundly trounced,
 where the prize-boy of fashion's college
 What happened? Though his eyes were reading,
 when, from behind the doorway, hidden
 What power enslaves you, with your seeming
 where (standard rhyme) are youth and fleetness?
 What trifling could be more complete?
 where scribbling friends have interjected
 When we've retreated to the banner
 when galloping at headlong pace
 when he arrived; not in the slightest:
 whether it goes careering past,
 when not quite eighteen years of age.
 when our Zaretsky met his eyes.
 What cause has won me your attention?
 Whatever in this rough confection
 What else? Quite drunk with love's illusion,
 What fate is my tomorrow brewing?
 ``What, Grandison? oh, Grandison!
 ``What in the world is more distressing
 We all meandered through our schooling
 ``What nonsense, Tanya! in those other
 What of it? Nothing. I'm just sending
 ``What of them, Tanya? I was able,
 We each have enemies in this world,
 Where are you? come - and my own right
 Whenever nyanya had collected
 Whether the arrow has my number,
 When progress and amelioration
 When we draw a fellow in,
 "When will the devil come for you?"''
 While Lensky'd long been meditating
 ``Whither, oh whither are ye banished,
 ``Wait, I'll present you - but you banish
 what can one do? as said above,
 Who in the princess for that second
 what came from this unlooked-for meeting;
 Who taught her all this mad, slapdash,
 what feelings would assume control
 what traps he'd set him, with what malice
 Whose fond attentions will astound us?
 Who'll never fault our vices, or
 what's more, I loved you; but my hunger,
 what was it in your heart it found
 Who'll sow no calumnies around us?
 we'd better hasten to the ball,
 ``Which neighbour, dear? My head became
 ``Well, I won't hold you up or bore you;
 Who in that flash could not have reckoned
 Who is there who will truly measure
 Whom then to credit? Whom to treasure?
 Who taught her an address so tender,
 Was she the Tanya he'd exhorted
 We too shall find our hour is waiting;
 We've many neighbours round about;
 what dream accounts for her distraction?
 Why, pretty one, you're up already!
 what held me was my predilection,
 what have your wits to do with me?
 what is he? Just an apparition,
 what it's transported to our shore
 what kind of thought, what observation,
 ``Why not?'' ``I'd choose the other quarter
 what London calls, with humble duty
 what moves along the hidden ways
 what occupied his chafing powers
 where are the reveries this time,
 ``Why did you visit us, but why?
 Why have you gone all pale and queasy?''
 what store of riches it imparts!
 where a sharp nail has made a dent.
 where her security's complete.
 17 ``Written at Odessa.'' Pushkin's note.
 Who's not disgusted by cajoling,
 ``Who? that fat general?'' Tanya cried.
 ``Who would have thought it?'' ``What an age!''
 Worse luck, Larina crawled; the employment
 where fate had fixed our confrontation,
 Without romance, or false insistence,
 Why then do you pursue me now?
 where can we find your equal?
 where civil treacheries are rife,
 where flows a little glittering brook,
 Why is Tatyana guiltier-seeming?
 where, in a cab, and furious hurry,
 Who could have looked the poet better,
 Was it to no effect that he,
 With reason, too: for when he'd vetted
 With that, in tears, and quite worn out,
 where Tanya now confronts Eugene.
 where you were born as well, I think,
 when, in pale sky, the stars' procession
 1 ``Written in Bessarabia.'' Pushkin's note.
 when night patrol's a perilous calling;
 when our sublimest aspiration,
 4 ``Well-known restaurateur.'' Pushkin's note.
 With womankind, the less we love them,
 where shall he go, my rogue, my hearty?
 when hourly we ourselves betrayed it,
 when in the park, in the all&eacute;e
 ``Why, Tanya, what...?'' ``All's dull and trifling.
 where's the high aim, the ardent sense
 where two old pinetrees stand united:
 whether from heaven or from hell,
 when little notes come on a tray.
 when, on the plain, green herbs are massed,
 when shall I start on my escape?
 when suddenly I saw this treasure
 when, utterly worn out by rhyming,
 when we begin to talk of verse);
 when we see him from afar,
 we have to cherish and admire
 while a mazurka holds the crowd;
 while dear Tatyana's youth grows dimmer:
 while floors would split from crash of heel,
 while in the hut a girl is singing;
 while men, all sombre, all the same,
 while, marmot-like, he hibernated --
 while odes have high and noble aims...''
 while Petersburg's already rousing,
 while roar of violins contrives
 while she's from top to toe surveyed;
 while serious topics were disputing,
 which held him silently subjected,
 which has recalled, without precision,
 which I myself won't praise or blame
 which, listening with some condescension,
 which Ovid sang, for which the bard,
 whither does all my yearning tend?
 which smilingly your friend, supported
 which with a blush he leaves unread.
 whispered by heart a note addressed
 whisper of breeze announces morning,
 whisper repeated to the crone.
 whispers some ballad of the hour,
 wakened at the same hour of night
 wild as a forest deer, and fearful,
 will anger you in its confession.
 will blossom into splendid highways:
 we'll draw it deeper in our net;
 will disappear as fast as smoke:
 walked homeward round the kitchen garden;
 will find the ice elude his grip
 will give you a complete reply.
 we'll go with her to that delicious
 will halt her horse and, gripping tightly
 will in a flash decide his lot.
 will in my soul be hushed and dying.
 we'll keep love's price appreciating,
 will loyally discharge its duties,
 will reach, and past the tomb's compound
 will the benighted reason smile,
 we'll talk, and talk, and then we'll show
 wanders in a distracted way
 wine of the Comet6 fills the cup;
 won't benefit these guts of mine.''
 won't even cross their minds by stealth...
 who all his life would garner praise
 who can combine it with the free
 who'd sit, and at the end of play
 whose heart experience has cooled
 whose heart on dreams was wont to thrive,
 whose kindly hand will ruffle down
 whose memory will preserve for me
 who early died as die the brave'' --
 whose serfs are miserably thin;
 who else? - the hero of our novel!
 wronged always in disgraceful fashion --
 who, in good time, would calmly get
 who in the country spends her summer,
 who in the dark came flashing through
 who'll clap an entrechat, or scoff
 who late at night are whirled away
 ``who loves you more than I, let's see
 who never learnt how dreamers babble;
 who never scorned the social rabble;
 who on a deuce, that famous cheat,
 who swaggers in with the reply.
 whom shall we never find a bore?
 who sets me snoring then and there --
 whom thirty centuries have adored!
 whoever you may be, a friend,
 who walks with sorrow, and with danger,
 who was it that you dreamt about?''
 were all the law that I would use;
 were chanted, I remember when --
 were from his vision quite withdrawn.
 We all resemble more or less
 word on his lips, and thought: it's sheer
 were placed across the gulf to make
 were picking berries from the bough,
 words mispronounced, thoughts ill-expressed
 were served in order of their rank.
 works where contemporary man
 were you in love when you were young?''
 was an enchanting country nook:
 was asked around as quite a catch --
 was by forebodings much oppressed.
 was brought there by a huckster who
 What folly! and what retribution!
 wished him to come and say farewell.
 wishes his madness to the devil,
 was finding leisure's vacuum cruel;
 was far from happy with his role.
 was G&ouml;ttingen, his alma mater,
 We each enjoy a special hobby,
 was his absorption in their sense.
 With a sharp epigram it's pleasant
 was his; we'd both drunk passion's chalice:
 was it not you, dear apparition,
 What breasts! What soul!... We'll go one day
 What of it? it's euphonious, pleasant,
 When I defected from their union
 While under the connubial banner
 Walking? The country that you roam
 ``Well, what?'' the neighbour says, ``he's killed.''
 we sometimes like to hear again
 Was it for you that I became
 was one who raged and raged again,
 Was it not in such sweet employment
 With mounts from home, or postal station,
 was just created for the part.
 was quite beyond his wit, we found.
 was stripped away, and mists encroaching
 What ails him? he's in some strange daze!
 What do I want? what am I after,
 What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
 What if your pistol-shot has smitten
 was still mysterious and enticing --
 What scorn I see in the expression
 was that calm brow of one who swooned.
 was the first thing that Olga said.
 Where is the fire that once ignited,
 When out to burst a rival's bubble,
 We must confess that taste deserts us
 was the sad poet not confounded
 Winter!... The countryman, enchanted,
 was undiscovered to that day.
 was younger still, but at that stage
 with an avowal just as artless;
 with amber pipes from Tsaregrad;12
 with a blunt cue for the duration,
 with a consumption, they've relied.
 with a first click, the catch is tried.
 with all our hearts, and who require
 with an obeisance I'll hand over...
 with a quick look perusing lightly
 with a small tray and a teacup.
 with a Venetian maiden who
 with any torture so exquisite
 with brilliant conquests by the shower,
 with balm of prayer my torn and rended
 When comes my moment to untether?
 Wildly the fearful laughter pealed;
 with bended knees a windmill dances,
 with broods of children of all ages,
 with bursts of passion from the heart,
 with cranium aching fit to split;
 with charming forefinger she traced
 with comedies of swarm and din;
 with combs, and steel utensils serving
 with censure - I've done all to earn it!
 with careful schemes of decoration
 with care Zaretsky stows away
 with custom, love would fade away;
 with cause that I've recalled them here.
 with draughts from love's enticing flask,
 with deep emotion looks about
 with deep emotion through and through,
 with deeds; that dunces now and then
 with demoiselles of riper age;
 with each nuance of wintry glow:
 with Eugene frozen where he stood.
 with Eugene proved a tempting prize.
 with eyes aflame Onegin rises
 with eyes of love, with greed to swallow
 with every different kind of rabble...''
 with every sort of home possession:
 with fright, she hears the approaching bear;
 with fond caress? whose adoration
 with foppery and too much starch,
 with fire from every cross of gold.
 with gown and slippers; tearing hurry,
 with Guillot; while pourparlers last
 with grave goodbyes to the bereaved,
 with heart that's grown unused to praise,
 watched sun and clock - then by such labours
 watch for your smile, and catch your gaze
 with her own forests and her meads...
 with his forefathers would seem better;
 watch the games we maidens play.''
 within her bosom to abate,
 with irresistible refulgence,
 with jealousy beyond all measure
 with lies and jokes that packed a punch:
 with lampions studded all about
 with lines to mark where they were sleeping...
 with love and comfort in your meaning,
 with lively and pellucid look,
 with me to see an alien strand;
 with mournful sound the secret shade
 with neighbour Lensky, the deceased.
 with old Anisia. The next day
 with our Mamas, and a sensation
 with our poor girl was kind and good;
 without an elegiac frill,
 without a goal on which to fix,
 without a trace of spite or plot,
 without a word Tatyana leant
 without preliminary feeler
 with Olga, all have pierced her soul;
 without surprise or rage... his laden,
 with pleasure on his vengeful act.
 with parks and mansions, open up.
 with perturbation and with worry;
 with passion and with shrewd obliqueness
 with pots and basins out of mind,
 with puzzled and confused regard...
 with recent fortune, vainly waited
 with sabre's slash, and bullet's blast.
 with such a blissful, brief infection --
 with sheer enchantment fills her cup!
 with shelves of books deployed for action,
 with sighs unconsciously regretful.
 with spinning noise and senseless flashing
 with storm and tumult in his head,
 with scorn to make my world a hell.
 with Tolstoy's2 brush, or decorated
 Walking her horse in introspection
 Who on earth is he? not... our hero?
 With spelling scrambled to perdition,
 with tears, in quarters of the maids:
 with the pink glow the snows assume
 with the resounding chime of glass.
 with this the hero of my tale:
 When Eugene's turn for salutation
 Where to, God knows. The trail is dead.
 with tenderness he'd watched and noted
 Which one comes first? It's just the same
 Well, I must make a frank confession,
 with the grand general in her wake --
 with trees decked in their silvery kit,
 with the unmistakeable sideview
 with tufts of snow; and through the lifted
 ``Whose glance, provoking inspiration,
 with thoughts of him in ceaseless round.
 Weltered in tears, and sorely smarting,
 with The Well-Meaner10 on her knee?
 with three roan horses in a line
 with visions of enchanted night,
 with whom your thoughts are so obsessed --
 with work at home; but when he'd gone,
 with years no more to meet our gaze?
 with your good offices, and so
 with young Semy&oacute;nova,9 and there
 would be allied to him by fate;
 would bless the form his fortune took.
 would cause widespread remark and tattle,
 would fill Tatyana from afar
 would Hymen bring us - blooms that might
 would have been all that we required!
 would have been spared this laceration.
 would have divined the tender, shrinking
 would leave her dithering and tossing.
 would launch into self-sacrifice;
 would not have recognized again
 would on those evenings guess the fate
 would settle, on the morrow morning,
 would say goodbye and drive away,
 wound that had seared my Tanya's heart!
 would talk, keep silent, laugh, then frown --
 we visit them, or without fail
 we weep for the young lover's end,
 we were swept off, in reverie's haze,
 why, at the thought, my husband's mother
 why fight what's known to be decisive?
 ``why, Olga's younger, and she's bedded.
 X
 X
 X
 X
 X
 X
 XI
 XL
 XI
 XV
 XI
 XX
 XV
 XX
 XX
 XL
 XI
 XV
 XX
 XX
 XV
 XI
 XV
 XI
 XL
 XI
 XL
 XX
 XV
 XL
 XL
 XX
 XX
 XI
 XII
 XVI
 XLI
 XXI
 XXI
 XVI
 XVI
 XXI
 XVI
 XLI
 XLI
 XVI
 XXI
 XLI
 XXI
 XXI
 XII
 XXI
 XII
 XLI
 XII
 XLI
 XII
 XXI
 XII
 XVI
 XII
 XII
 XVI
 XXII
 XXIV
 XLIX
 XVII
 XIII
 XXIV
 XXIX
 XVII
 XLIX
 XIII
 XVII
 XXII
 XLII
 XVII
 XXIX
 XXIX
 XXIV
 XXIX
 XLII
 XXIV
 XXIV
 XLII
 XXIV
 XXII
 XLIV
 XIII
 XXII
 XVII
 XLIV
 XLII
 XLIV
 XLIV
 XIII
 XVII
 XVII
 XLIX
 XXIX
 XLIV
 XIII
 XXIV
 XXIX
 XXII
 XLIV
 XXII
 XIII
 XXIX
 XIII
 XLII
 XXIV
 XLIX
 XXII
 XXII
 XXIX
 XXIII
 XXIII
 XLIII
 XVIII
 XVIII
 XXIII
 XVIII
 XVIII
 XXIII
 XXIII
 XLIII
 XVIII
 XXIII
 XVIII
 XXIII
 XLIII
 XVIII
 XLIII
 XLIII
 XVIII
 XXIII
 XLIII7
 (XIII, XIV,) XV
 XIV
 XIV
 XIV
 XLV
 XXV
 XXV
 XIV
 XLV
 XXV
 XLV
 XXV
 XXV
 XIV
 XLV
 XLV
 XXV
 XIV
 XLV
 XXV
 XXV
 XIV
 XXVI
 XXVI
 XLVI
 XXVI
 XXVI
 XXVI
 XLVI
 XXVI
 XLVI
 XXVI
 XXVI
 XLVI
 XLVI
 XLVII
 XLVII
 XXVII
 XXVII
 XXVII
 XLVII
 XXVII
 XLVII
 XXVII
 XXVII
 XXVII
 XXVII
 XLVII
 XLVIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XLVIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XLVIII
 XXVIII
 XLVIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XXX
 XIX
 XXX
 XIX
 XIX
 XIX
 XXX
 XXX
 XIX
 XXX
 XIX
 XXX
 XXX
 XIX
 XXX
 XIX
 XXXI
 XXXV
 XXXV
 XXXV
 XXXI
 XXXI
 XXXI
 XXXV
 XXXI
 XXXV
 XXXI
 XXXV
 XXXI
 XXXI
 XXXV
 XXXV
 XXXVI
 XXXII
 XXXVI
 XXXII
 XXXVI
 XXXVI
 XXXVI
 XXXVI
 XXXII
 XXXII
 XXXII
 XXXII
 XXXII
 XXXVI
 XXXII
 XXXVII
 XXXIII
 XXXIII
 XXXIII
 XXXVII
 XXXIII
 XXXIII
 XXXIII
 XXXVII
 XXXIII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXIII
 XXXVI6
 XXXVII
 XXXII ends, is Pushkin's own contribution, a sample as it were of what he can do.'' Nabokov.
 XXXVIII
 XXXVIII
 XXXVIII
 XXXVIII
 XXXVIII
 XXXVIII
 (XXXVIII) XXXIX
 (XXXVIII,2) XXXIX
 (XV, XVI,2) XVII
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIX
 XXXIX
 XXXIX
 XXXIX
 (XXXIX,2) XL
 (XXXIX, XL, XLI,) XLII
 years back, to call up many a fable;
 You've guessed before it all began:
 yes, even there its triumph grows.
 ``You're married? No idea whatever...
 yes, focus on them your lorgnette,
 yes, in that spring-time, in low-lying
 yes, these were our forefathers' ways,
 yet a capricious inclination,
 yet, as each rule has its exception,
 Yet once for him her thoughts had whirled,
 You'd never class her as a beauty;
 yet dared not trust what I could see.
 yet floods of talk around the town...
 ``You know him, do you?'' ``Yes and no.''
 yet he'd back you through thick and thin:
 yet he fell out of love at last
 yet how I wish that I might raise
 yet people's malice and suspicion
 Yes, youth divines, in giddy madness,
 Yet - fear itself she found presented
 you acted well, that dread occasion,
 you called there twice, and since then took
 you'd made appearance in my dreaming;
 you'd not so much as know the name,
 your dashing one, is she surviving?''
 your feet, to pale and waste... what rapture!
 Yes, spleen was waiting like a sentry,
 you find the country godforsaken;
 your grief would fail to touch my heart,
 Yet hissing froth deals a malicious,
 Yet sweeter far, at such a time,
 Yet the mazurka keeps today
 ``You criticize Moscow? why make such a fuss
 Your curiosity is burning
 ``You don't see what to do? that's funny:
 Your horse, blunt-shoed and all unwary,
 You husbands, deeply I respect you!
 You'll love again, but you must teach
 yet, truthfully and not in chaff,
 Young ladies jump for future blisses...
 your advent swamps me in its flood!
 your battles, lawless and atrocious,
 your cold discourse, were less unkind --
 you drink the magic draught of yearning,
 your early life, unlock your tongue:
 young poet, be for ever blest!''
 young Tanya first appeared to me,
 your heels will squash the ladies' toes! &gt;
 you help him to an honoured fate
 your heroes, raging and ferocious,
 youthful, who ripened in his time,
 you kept your friendship with our friend:
 you learn life's sweetness, and with this
 you left no steps that could be tracked:
 you'll recognize him soon enough, --
 you loved the opulent contact
 you made me drunk as one could ask!
 your molten gold, your charmed infusion;
 you object of my guileless ditties!
 your pride, some answer, or in truth
 you're all in fever... heavens above.''
 you see, with tears and incantation
 you see your fated tempter stand.
 yourself too long from social life.''
 you sought - tumultuous recollection,
 ``Your modish world, I'll do without it;
 you gave me such a shocking fright!
 ``You pile one eclogue on another!
 young traitresses by the platoon,
 your heart some self-restraint; for each
 youth is a fever; we must spare
 youth which has nothing to regret,
 your icy look, your stern dissuasion,
 you know I'm hard to comprehend...
 you'll never leave me to my fate.
 you'll read: here's Pradt,7 here's Walter Scott!
 your loved one, honourable reader!
 your matchlessness, to seek to capture
 your night of fretting's left no trace!
 you newborn work, and like a winner
 your presence aches, and in my blood!
 you're really going? Well, I'm sad.
 you're sure to find her portrait in it:
 you see the two in uniform...
 your tears would flow - but your emotion,
 you too have seen on Neva's brink.
 your Tanya's image in your mind,
 you've made so many secret rhymes,
 Yet Tanya's note made its impression
 ``You know, it's true, how I attended,
 you took an honourable part --
 you won't find that quite so much catch...
 your words, and in my soul to explore
 you were the first ones he forswore;
 ``You're ill, God have you in his keeping,
 your Zeus, your Cypris, your whole band
 ``You're off? why, there's a poet for you!''
 you age, and life's just grief and sadness...''
 your chorus, is it dead for ever?
 youth's choice, the flower of French cuisine:
 you in my arms on gingerbread?''
 you've paid insanity its due.
 ``You're wrong.'' ``But what I wonder at
 You too, mamas, I pray attend it,
 You too, prime beauties in your flower
 ``You wrote to me, and nothing spoken
 ``You yawn, Onegin?'' ``As I'm used to.''
 Zar&eacute;tsky, sometime king of brawls
 Zaretsky bit his lip. Eugene
 Zaretsky draws up a convention
 Zaretsky, engineer-in-waiting,
 Zaretsky rose without discussion;
 Zaretsky watched, and stood there grinning.
 Zhukovsky
 Zizi, my crystal and my gem,




































 --------




























 ... ...














































 --------















































































































































































































 --------















 ... ...





























































































































 ... ...














































































 --------








































































































































































 --------








































 --------































































































































































































































 --------








--------------------

 then sudden fear attacked Tatyana...
 Onegin's Letter to Tatyana
 ``But tell me, which one was Tatyana?''
 I too - when I recall Svetlana5
 and melancholy as Svetlana,2
 thou, my Svetlana!
 15 A mocking reference to Mikhail Muraviev's poem ``To the Goddess of the Neva.''
 and then old cousin Pelag&eacute;ya
 ``Princess, mon ange!'' ``Pachette!'' ``Alina!''
 album and stays, Princess Alina,
 Friends of my Ruslan and Lyudmila,
 ``Akulka'' the onetime Selina,
 swapped it for odd tomes of Malvina,
 Praskovya re-baptized ``Polina'';
 ``How long can you... ?'' ``Dearest kuzina!''
 diversely urging the same plea,
 have gnawed our bridges, and the flea
 but now my brain is darkened, Tanya:
 I'm old, my mind is blunted, Tanya;
 ``I reckon, by God's will. My Vanya
 My mind is fuddled.'' ``Tell me, nyanya,
 ``How slow you are at guessing, nyanya!''
 ``How did you come to marry, nyanya?''
 Buy&aacute;nov whirls off Pustyakova;
 Diana's breast, the cheeks of Flora,
 Tatyana on; Miss Kharlikova,
 in Adam Smith was his diploma;
 arch-rake, pothouse tribune-persona,
 and, in the district, this persona
 Moscow, loved daughter of Russia,
 O Russia!
 Idol mio or Benedetta,
 a liar still, Lyub&oacute;v Petrovna,
 still powdered is Luk&eacute;rya Lvovna,
 and slowly day begins to climb.
 the nightly luminaries climb.
 and rest his dear bones in the tomb,
 presses its forebears to the tomb.
 stands over my poor nurse's tomb.
 down in our damp earth-mother's womb!''
 but I, in love, was dull and dumb.
 Is spleen his trouble, or the dumb
 Iv&aacute;n Petr&oacute;vich still is dumb,
 and telling trochee from iambic
 He was without that dithyrambic
 or for a lamentable manic,
 a monster of the gens Satanic,
 How oft she'd lead me, by the Tauric
 and the deep-throated billows' choric
 Is Others' View,5 that clever lyric,
 Remember the retort satiric!
 of unaffectedly fantastic
 no deathless truths, nothing scholastic;
 she finds, in order alphabetic:
 of spring he lives, he's energetic;
 Searching the table exegetic
 the elegy, grown paralytic,
 boo Phaedra out as paralytic,
 he leaves one morning the hermetic
 military-foppish, diplomatic --
 he informed this envoy diplomatic
 Eugene's response was automatic;
 that world where every man's a critic
 But soft! You hear? A scowling critic,
 Through the tight ranks - aristocratic,
 was the first thing that Olga said.
 if I, like you, had been a bard.
 of Gulnare, he would play a card
 and blesses the unrivalled brand
 in deepest thought at the chess-board
 sometimes, in reverie's sacred land,
 She entered the deserted yard.
 out of the hand of that same bard:
 his illness lends him courage and
 and always the inspired regard --
 with puzzled and confused regard...
 then, stepping nearer, Eugene said:
 and those we sing for will be paid
 on jam, and speeches in regard
 your Zeus, your Cypris, your whole band
 Tatyana lowered her regard
 and tears were drowning her regard.
 Olga's no life in her regard:
 Her eyes were opened, and she said
 perfervid language of the bard,
 which Ovid sang, for which the bard,
 Now nearer... hooves... and in the yard
 and put a cross-sign on the maid.
 the spring invites you to the land
 Eugene attends the boulevard,
 condemned to a lifetime of hard,
 until the grave by your strong hand:
 but in the old days she had heard
 and dead ideas from that old hoard,
 How could she? why, he'd never heard...
 the source's chattering voice is heard;
 came out so soft, it scarce was heard.
 from the first moment it was heard
 or worse, to a soir&eacute;e. Unheard
 the tolerant Evgeny heard --
 So my Zaretsky, as I said,
 to the princess, in his weak hand,
 to rains, and flax, and the stockyard.''
 by nervous hands of a schoolmaid:
 now warmth and blossom are on hand,
 a masculine disguise to aid
 long, lively tales from wonderland,
 of ruts that grace our fatherland.
 a Lancer wooed and won her hand,
 to save the honour of our land
 I leave the verdict in your hand.
 have clearly got the upper hand
 more searching than Chateaubriand;
 the letter from Tatyana's hand:
 nor his,2 who sings of Finland's maid.
 His father failed to understand
 Tanya begins to understand
 for quite a while by fortune's hand.
 and took a mortgage on his land.
 each grips his pistol in his hand.
 hear my confession as I stand
 or letters in a young girl's hand.
 and on their marks has made them stand;
 Olga is there, he sees her stand
 had been imposed by winter's hand;
 you see your fated tempter stand.
 as at a censure that was hard.
 after the martyr's price it paid,
 in untold beauty close at hand.
 with me to see an alien strand;
 his awkwardness, he's hardly said
 in front of you, on every hand,
 I feel a small foot in my hand;
 put a strong staff into my hand,
 a flood on which no frosty band
 his transports, and the marriage-bed
 and doctors, he'd have died in bed.
 one smoothes the pillows down in bed,
 Tanya's undressed, and lies in bed.
 At last he wakes, and stirs in bed,
 Tatyana simply lay in bed,
 Now, Lensky, would it be so bad
 billiards are dropped, cue put to bed:
 on a small bench by Tanya's bed,
 beside the window-sill, that bed
 in sultry sleep, in lonely bed,
 At first Onegin's tongue produced
 ``OE'' devotedly inlaced.
 with charming forefinger she traced
 take any novel, clearly traced
 where admonitions are pronounced,
 where nowadays I'm soundly trounced,
 but in an earlier age retarded,
 Her father, kindly, well-regarded,
 some regimental bard has added
 a stanza villainously padded.
 the crash of plates and knives is blended
 not for the first time he succeeded
 with balm of prayer my torn and rended
 stumblingly call to mind he did
 always comes back: I'll not be wedded.
 always before the volume ended
 helping the poor, or while I mended
 loved someone else, not her intended,
 ``But I was simply not intended
 Always our fervid hero tended
 Agree, the way Eugene proceeded
 but at the window, in the splendid
 this Grandison of hers was splendid,
 ``why, Olga's younger, and she's bedded.
 They buzz - but then all talk's suspended --
 he'd sack the Muses and get wedded;
 ``You know, it's true, how I attended,
 Should your perfections be expended
 In the two sisters' rooms extended,
 now Lovelace's renown has faded
 amongst the crafty and small-minded,
 There was a period when cold-blooded
 and heartless pleasure was up-graded;
 High ceilings everywhere abounded;
 Poor Lensky! where the tomb is bounded
 in which so lately it abounded
 both dull and ludicrous, the bunded
 was the sad poet not confounded
 in the saloon, brocade-surrounded,
 Here stands, with shady park surrounded,
 rapture was just two weeks ahead;
 you in my arms on gingerbread?''
 pursuits of a monotonous breed
 Eugene, with solemn face, paid heed,
 give me the homely hearth, and lend...''
 the bear let out a roar, and held
 first snow for shoulders, breast and head:
 for Tanya, winter's ways are dread.
 vanishes with his load of dread.
 the grey-haired nurse with kerchiefed head;
 in grief that nothing else could mend;
 ``some are far distant, some are dead''.
 can disavow that. I have read
 On whom alone can we depend?
 two verses of the Aeneid.
 you know I'm hard to comprehend...
 and kept quite silent while she read.
 The horses, as they sense the dead,
 to see my kin, and in the end
 perhaps her love could in the end
 to life grew colder than the dead.
 interior d&eacute;cor in the end
 a hidden beauty in the end:
 same Pom, same husband to the end;
 a true companion to the end,
 He drained his glass down to the end
 But you, blest husbands, to the end
 and give her comfort to the end:
 of entertaining the half-dead:
 on springtime grasses of the field,
 his choice could shock or might offend;
 the draught whose blessings are agreed,
 begot by boredom out of greed.
 whither does all my yearning tend?
 and where he'd silently agreed.
 under the table's linen shield,
 in friendly gatherings where I read,
 they rise and ripen and fall dead:
 had drawn Eugene's especial heed
 Goodbye, for now we make an end.
 I'm sick, my dear, I'm sick indeed.
 which with a blush he leaves unread.
 Martin Zad&eacute;ka fails to mend;
 on which a carpet has been spread,
 before the fire a table's spread;
 whoever you may be, a friend,
 ``All right, I'll come then...'' ``What a friend!''
 But don't be cross, my darling friend,
 Lel6 floats about above her head;
 Bordeaux, you're like a faithful friend,
 have reunited friend to friend!
 his acts and words to suit our end?
 the horrid nightmare must portend
 if you'd still been with me, dear friend,
 still has Monsieur Finemouche for friend,
 you kept your friendship with our friend:
 the poet struck down by his friend!
 by nature, contradiction's friend.
 but Olga would have never read!
 ``Boredom, that's what so bad, my friend.''
 I don't know why, but for my friend
 He's here - Monsieur Guillot, my friend.
 to ask of you that you transcend
 my father blessed me. So I'd spend
 slumber still floats above his head.
 a single thing to her. His head
 and silently he hung his head.
 touches obliquely, but with speed,
 with storm and tumult in his head,
 The happiness of youth is dead,
 goes out of us when youth is dead.
 he's put belle Tatiana instead.
 Where to, God knows. The trail is dead.
 talk that might turn a young girl's head)
 is brought to table at full speed.
 but now grown plain and kind in stead,
 But that's enough. At once, in stead,
 anticipates a swim, in stead
 to blow his brains out, but in stead
 on the dull life that bachelors lead;
 we weep for the young lover's end,
 just like, on turf, your fleeting tread.
 my fate, it leads me to what end?''
 and for belle Nina, as it read,
 tries out the ice with cautious tread,
 others will follow where they tread...
 but you're not paying any heed.''
 the ballroom drove me off my head:
 how long is it?'' ``And since I fed
 for his old courses to be changed.
 for happiness, I sought, and ranged
 and glad he was he'd thus arranged
 unloved, and friendless, and estranged.
 His wife, just like Tatyana, had
 ``Whither, oh whither are ye banished,
 Oh, when, and to what desert banished,
 By chance those verses haven't vanished;
 my little feet, where have you vanished,
 My goddesses! Where are you banished?
 have other maidens, since you vanished,
 in fashion that's half-glad, half-anguished:
 that table where the lamp has languished,
 midst crones with endless tears to shed,
 he's racing millward like a bird.
 his nature would be changed and steadied,
 beyond the grave we all must build --
 ``Who? that fat general?'' Tanya cried.
 from her Monsieur took on the child.
 someone towards whose heart and mind
 to talk to her, but language died.
 he leaves a tender verse behind,
 with a consumption, they've relied.
 his tea with rum quite left behind,
 unfathomable to the mind;
 with pots and basins out of mind,
 in deep anxiety of mind.
 people there were he glorified,
 Lensky, that tragic victim, died...
 can yet keep nail-care much in mind:
 custom is despot of mankind.
 cold, pure as ice, and as unkind,
 your cold discourse, were less unkind --
 rewards the music of your mind
 that poison brew; and in your mind
 your Tanya's image in your mind,
 If suddenly aloft she spied
 in any picture of this kind:
 caricatured them in his mind.
 he's dreadfully dissatisfied;
 he sends, a second, then a third.
 of the old Tatyana. Eugene tried
 she doesn't see, or doesn't mind;
 Onegin wastes, you'd almost find
 with a first click, the catch is tried.
 He was sweet-natured, and yet wild.
 debauchery was praised, and studied
 reverie hounds you, and you find
 and useful goods of every kind.
 for hours alone; she walked and walked...
 her way; she passed, then as she walked
 profoundly sunk, Tatyana stalked
 the bear - what next? - behind her stalked.
 Eugene, at Olga's side, was racked
 you left no steps that could be tracked:
 she lacked her sister's beauty, lacked
 suggests a victim richly decked...
 enormous bear; Tatyana yelled,
 For what charade is he apparelled?
 monsters the maiden stood revealed.
 the bank, the immobile stream are levelled
 beneath a shroud that's all dishevelled;
 Wildly the fearful laughter pealed;
 in bed, a young man, stiff and chilled;
 Evgeny looks at Lensky, chilled
 ``Well, what?'' the neighbour says, ``he's killed.''
 he hears a voice; ``well, what? he's killed!''
 foes, friends and loves, their voice is stilled.
 Yet once for him her thoughts had whirled,
 the impatient conqueror was humbled!
 but suddenly a snowdrift rumbled,
 but no, my Moscow never stumbled
 and what came out? a hairy, tumbled,
 beneath it, vapour wreathed and coiled.
 down from his Kalmuck steed he rolled
 the samovar of evening boiled,
 the eager players are enrolled --
 and saved from being charmed or fooled!
 whose heart experience has cooled
 A sudden clatter!... blood was curdled...
 Meanwhile with pain her soul was girdled,
 The lady of the house has fled.
 another, and his memory's fled
 fever of rhyme: thereby he's doubled
 hymnal as, endlessly unfurled,
 the pangs with which his heart was troubled,
 he found all kinds of brickbat hurled.
 His hair was fashionably curled,
 and Lensky, left eye closing, aimed --
 could it be she... or had he dreamed?
 the girl he'd scorned in what he deemed
 on Richardson gone raving mad.
 but just then Eugene's pistol flamed...
 to drive the swooning senses mad;
 to wiser words and deeds, and learned
 her manner is no less contained;
 for whom her passion has been planned
 don't let me stray in paths unplanned.''
 and pledged to you, and firmly planned:
 sweet words by which her pain was banned --
 her bow, as calm and as restrained.
 he watched the guests and, as he dined,
 away, so cool, so unconcerned?
 has something low and unrefined.
 below the others who have signed
 approaches Olga; Lensky's signed
 Who in that flash could not have reckoned
 no dream. You'd scarce arrived, I reckoned
 I had most surely never reckoned
 her feelings were far more inclined --
 in quilted dressing-gown adorned,
 then to the altar, to be crowned.
 had with its brilliant mantle crowned --
 in darkest forest depths and drowned
 and in the country, blissful, horned,
 was that calm brow of one who swooned.
 For several days she peaked and pined
 is in your poetry enshrined?''
 he's host, that's obvious. Thus enlightened
 The jealous poet's gloom is lightened!
 knowing the offender, he'd been frightened
 Tanya's no longer quite so frightened
 could it be she, who just had turned
 to my young days, it's time I turned
 But I myself read my bedizened
 to nobody except a wizened
 a house, a village, and a wood
 but scarcely understood a word.
 Is he a Melmoth, a Childe Harold,
 she sat there; through her teeth a word
 acute and subtle - in a word
 and pale, and fade without a word!
 and looked at him without a word,
 your presence aches, and in my blood!
 while a mazurka holds the crowd;
 before a cold, indifferent crowd,
 among my friends, in all that crowd
 with our poor girl was kind and good;
 and everything is cramped and loud;
 the ancients have gone stiff and cold,
 might have resounded long and loud
 Melpomene wails long and loud,
 times were when I was sharp and bold:
 Farewell the games of golden childhood!
 he fell in love with darkest wildwood,
 to know you, swooned, and in a second
 as gage of all things that were good,
 as yours did, Homer, godlike lord,
 and trails alone around the wood.''
 Who in the princess for that second
 I really dote upon the word:
 by the new whisper in the wood?
 honest devotion to the good,
 Boston and ombre for the old,
 Arrived apace, he gives the word
 Buy&aacute;nov's heels have split the wood
 the moderns rage against the old.
 Evgeny echoed him: ``My second?
 your advent swamps me in its flood!
 with fire from every cross of gold.
 ``My sweet, my dearest heart, I'm old,
 fancy, a wine serene in mood,
 before their eyes they see unfold
 my giddy mistress made me proud.
 as much as in Moscow the proud.
 she guards, in silence and for good,
 of leaves that autumn killed for good,
 to Eugene's letter, word for word.
 And then she broods and mopes for good,
 and wrecked the flooring-boards for good;
 bidding us to reject for good
 regard, and slipped away for good, ...
 No, she's already pledged her word
 commands our rhymester-brotherhood:
 of trumpet, dagger, mask and sword,
 had made his name, when, bold as bold,
 with Eugene frozen where he stood.
 there's not a word she's understood;
 and there a tombstone says its word
 below a hill; a garden stood
 and washed its face, to her brought word
 Still tumbling, devil, snake and Cupid
 Tatyana went with them, and sped
 and where most surely notes are sped.
 to meet the unhappy poet, skipped
 just as she'd always been, she tripped
 Still in the porch, exhausted-stupid,
 Or, as by Lethe's bank he slumbered,
 perhaps no more sensations lumbered
 whom thirty centuries have adored!
 how many follies were engendered;
 friends, recollect how I surrendered
 far, far from Italy, his adored.
 with amber pipes from Tsaregrad;12
 past all endurance. You're referred
 and not because she'd once preferred
 or half-unwittingly preferred
 our lives were flat, and what had fired
 the needle, never had she lingered
 Her tender touch had never fingered
 her girlhood games; in them he'd shared,
 a treasure never to be shared.
 Beyond the stream there smoked and stirred
 threw Eugene at her feet - she stirred,
 no sound by which her soul is stirred.
 on Eugene, he was deeply stirred:
 it was that he'd been truly stirred,
 filled him with thoughts that swarmed and whirred;
 in quiet flood. A beetle whirred.
 as something not to be declared,
 at twenty, was a fop inbred,
 deep in Moldavia the abhorred,
 from all the world, they sat and pored
 he almost lost his mind, expired,
 both hearts to blaze had now expired;
 on Olga; from heart's ache still spared,
 at any time he'd be prepared.
 in terms where not a word was spared:
 no notice of them. But I've chattered
 if you come with me, they'll be flattered;
 however much her soul has faltered,
 and nothing in her look is altered:
 reader, or where you've shone and glittered!
 Onegin, my good friend, was littered
 that not a syllable be uttered
 in these last years all mixed and fluttered.
 The aunts exchanged a look, they fluttered,
 they nudged Tatyana, and each muttered
 that sat above the stove and purred
 would have been all that we required!
 I don't mean that she never shivered,
 no, even her eyebrow never quivered,
 they praise the Father of the world.
 lawgiver to the modish world?
 and now at last he saw the World.
 We each have enemies in this world,
 ditties of our secret world,
 ditty of our secret world,
 of inexperience would have passed,
 when, on the plain, green herbs are massed,
 the time to go has long since passed
 Unforced, as conversation passed,
 forests where my young age was passed
 struck down as if she'd been accused,
 she's their great friend, asked in, caressed,
 with whom your thoughts are so obsessed --
 whispered by heart a note addressed
 the silence when our talk had ceased!
 is in voluptuous languor dressed,
 with neighbour Lensky, the deceased.
 Like convicts in a dream released
 hold half the world still unreleased,
 words mispronounced, thoughts ill-expressed
 was by forebodings much oppressed.
 her hands affectionately pressed;
 where folded arms are tightly pressed.
 she brought her talents, never ceased,
 in warmer airs was half dispersed.
 He thought that Olga'd be confused,
 for long... for evermore. We've chased
 Still on the board, the beakers hissed,
 the earth for him grew dumb and closed?...
 you're really going? Well, I'm sad.
 no one was ever so engrossed:
 a haze in me, but I grew used
 Outside the gate Tatyana parted
 love's crown, delectable, awaited
 now, by green tablecloths awaited,
 Winter!... The countryman, enchanted,
 till then had been dispersed and wasted --
 but soon the ways we trod were parted
 that on the world's staircase there waited
 sadly he mourned for the departed.
 treaties of nations long departed,
 Eugene turned countryman. He tasted
 Reader, I wish that, as we parted --
 expecting winter, nature waited --
 a foe - our mood should be warm-hearted.
 ``Poor Yorick,'' said he, broken-hearted:
 his nag has smelt the snow, and planted
 Between them, every topic started
 Eugene would willingly have started
 at earliest morning out she started,
 of five more steps they went, slow-gaited,
 with recent fortune, vainly waited
 to whom your hearts are dedicated,
 to which so oft we've dedicated
 and whist, that's now so keenly f&ecirc;ted --
 and Fly&aacute;nov, amply lubricated,
 Napoleon here, intoxicated
 Since earliest boyhood he had doted
 she sang of childhood's fun, indited
 the headpiece-text is thus indited --
 He sang of love, to love subjected,
 which held him silently subjected,
 but for the effect that he created
 With reason, too: for when he'd vetted
 assembly, silent and dejected?
 once on the highway he'd detected
 Seeing Vladimir had defected,
 she'd never join the game selected,
 Thronged by adorers, I've detected
 there was no trace to be detected
 they've moved around and been reseated;
 So there she stood, forlorn, deserted!
 their masters' berries undetected
 Yet - fear itself she found presented
 Sometimes a landscape's represented,
 But who stands there, in this selected
 not the plain, timorous, dejected
 undressed, by candlelight selected
 and the churchyard where, new-erected,
 The tomcat, mannered and affected,
 a bit provincial and affected,
 quite self-absorbed and unaffected
 as infant sleep, or the unaffected
 his strangeness, wholly unaffected,
 his bow was wholly unaffected.
 by fresh ennui as he reflected
 of light that flowering fields reflected:
 in tears and violent tossing vented
 give for a bookshelf, a neglected
 a park, enormous and neglected,
 he found too much that he regretted:
 and my whole life has been directed
 singing in chorus as directed
 But my Eugene that night directed
 Whenever nyanya had collected
 before Onegin there collected
 and although Troy's greybeards, collected
 she grew accustomed, and contented.
 our disposition being invented
 a tomb, a Cyprian shrine's invented,
 I know, Godsent one, I'm protected
 the noise their rustic wheels projected --
 by deep and shady woods protected;
 the crown of marriage was projected
 He's always with her: either seated
 In French Onegin had perfected
 where scribbling friends have interjected
 Once home, he brought out and inspected
 Often of course you'll have inspected
 However closely he inspected,
 around Priam the much-respected,
 in darkness in her room, or treated
 that visitors must be expected.
 they find her somewhat unexpected,
 His father died; and (as expected)
 The clock of doom had struck as fated;
 she fell in love - the hour was fated...
 for aeons. Maybe it was fated
 his soul still blossomed out, and lighted
 above a stream the moon had lighted.
 And suddenly her radiance lighted
 He was too young to have been blighted
 of swaddling clothes - already blighted!
 they buried Uncle, congregated
 Suddenly, from a crest, she sighted
 its nullity I've always hated,
 No path to see: the snow has drifted
 He was no fool; appreciated
 with tufts of snow; and through the lifted
 his mind's eye focused on the hinted
 forehead, he strummed, his vision flitted
 before the clavichord with knitted
 Between the lines of text as printed,
 the vales dry out, grow brightly printed;
 the downy woods are greener-tinted;
 from dish of water, rings are shifted
 in due succession; hers is lifted
 he drives in brilliant sun; striated
 Lensky of course was quite untainted
 instead the chance to get acquainted
 That year the season was belated
 By now whist's heroes have completed
 (as I've so oft in jest related)?
 Lensky ingenuously related
 by all is sweetly mutilated,
 But it was passion that preempted
 From that rough spell at last exempted,
 with tenderness he'd watched and noted
 where two old pinetrees stand united:
 while, marmot-like, he hibernated --
 Where is the fire that once ignited,
 Lensky rejoiced. His designated
 A thought was born, and quickly noted...
 to the hero that she'd adopted.
 she sighed, and in a trance coopted
 of this our novel we reported,
 Tatyana watched the moon, and floated
 on waves of far niente floated,
 jealously, shyly, I've imported
 which smilingly your friend, supported
 but, without asking, they transported
 a hundred times afresh distorted;
 She was like him and always sported
 Now for the first time she's escorted
 Was she the Tanya he'd exhorted
 his tale of youthful love, narrated
 with Tolstoy's2 brush, or decorated
 the thought sank in, and penetrated:
 to eat and drink, then separated
 portfolios nobly illustrated
 on dining-chairs are all prostrated;
 of secret pain... but it's now rated
 So glut yourselves until you're sated
 can it be true, and firmly stated
 And long, as if through mists that spurted,
 To harmless idleness devoted,
 all that today we find absurd.
 and also prettier, I'll be bound,
 ``Get up: it's gone six! I'll be bound,
 pursue his love - and at one bound
 it stirs her drooping soul to bound
 she stopped at the loud torrent's bound,
 by heaven with such an unsubdued
 in manifesting, as he could,
 spying my features, as he could,
 and been as happy... as I could!
 a corpse on boards was all he found,
 though there he's no more to be found,
 was quite beyond his wit, we found.
 at least her tone is sometimes found
 what was it in your heart it found
 of mind got clarity new-found;
 of calculated slander should,
 already stirred him as they should.
 that she's so trustful, and imbued
 reader, you ask, and I'll expound --
 will reach, and past the tomb's compound
 stood thunder-struck. In what wild round
 by dreary snowdrifts piled around;
 gazes at all the scene around;
 Onegin's waiting on the ground.''
 let fall his pistol on the ground.
 he's left sad footprints on the ground.
 by Naiads, one foot on the ground,
 close as a shadow on the ground;
 perplexed... and rooted to the ground.
 an offering ready for the ground.
 from Million Street16 came floating round;
 the pensive Dryads' hiding-ground.
 Ist&oacute;mina,11 thronged all around
 and glittering whiteness all around.
 spread out its shadow all around --
 as it assembles them around;
 I'll make them spar another round,
 to her glass porch; pursues her round
 with thoughts of him in ceaseless round.
 the programme of his daily round.
 and the poet, without a sound,
 emotion, thought, and magic sound;
 and then a drozhky's clopping sound
 his heart was plunged! A sudden sound,
 more tender than it used to sound.
 frenzy which wrecks our lives for sound,
 at noontime does his horn resound
 hymns of the ages never sound.
 She hates a friendly voice's sound,
 and listen for the heart's first sound,
 the blood came smoking from the wound.
 with grave goodbyes to the bereaved,
 sweet old tradition was preserved:
 Russian pancakes were always served;
 as if some goal had been achieved.
 the strophe over which I slaved;
 had long been wasting and enslaved
 by pain and languishment; she craved
 for maybe fortune will have saved
 perhaps for fame, he was endowed;
 conclude that it's high time she wed!...
 and happy licence are allowed,
 by sluggish Lethe may be swallowed,
 and hope and passion; life had glowed
 the trail the youthful poet followed
 and blood had bubbled as it flowed;
 by now his bride-to-be has wed
 paterfamilias (unwed),
 at thirty, lucratively wed;
 the carriage of the newly-wed.
 a stride on Petrarch's path, allayed
 and soon will day's bright tune be played;
 or Freisch&uuml;tz as it might be played
 the murmur where the streamlet played...
 of house-familiars stands dismayed...
 and, hands a-tremble, Nyanya prayed
 while she's from top to toe surveyed;
 the lucky bard, and as he dozed
 the man she feared and idolized --
 Lensky has watched: his rage has blazed,
 among the guests she recognized
 he's lost his self-command, and crazed
 Friends, all this meant was: I've a date
 of wandering tribesmen; while the ravage
 from cruel fortune such a fate?
 a novel graced with such a name.
 And every morning I awake
 the simple legend - then a haze
 within her bosom to abate,
 she speeds her footsteps to a race,
 of their society turned her savage,
 down slopes of mountains, when a blaze
 misunderstanding, noise, and blame!
 as love's technique, when it would blare
 and opened Schiller... but the embrace
 who early died as die the brave'' --
 his head upon her shoulder... blaze
 which I myself won't praise or blame
 nothing you did gave cause for blame:
 has kept him warm in chimney's blaze
 her eyes are lowered, but ablaze,
 more and more brightly still they blaze.
 a hybrid cross of cat and crane.
 to fashion's absolute dictate,
 no longer does the herdsman chase
 on stage are thumping without cease;
 our modern Russia's plague and bane.
 long since unstirred by praise and fame
 in question, gossip, news and tale,
 I roam by the secluded lake.
 and shouts suggest a crowded wake;
 Tatyana breathed on the cold pane,
 has found a port for his old age,
 you help him to an honoured fate
 to heart. And in his misted gaze
 play on the window's frosted lace;
 arrives, the girl's exhausted gaze,
 and so in the salons could make
 he sang of lifetime's yellowed page --
 2 Heroine of Zhukovsky's poem of the same name.
 rings proudly in that sombre name.
 and lives, a veritable sage,
 ``Which neighbour, dear? My head became
 and ease his catch with all due care.
 Was it for you that I became
 and brains, and an attractive face.
 the pillars of the turnpike-gate;
 sooner or later will relate
 What ails him? he's in some strange daze!
 Just let yourself be your whole care,
 as I recall a bygone age?
 Omens dismayed her with their presage;
 her progress at the masquerade.
 an old man saw her as she came,
 he has to bring the battle-case.
 Petrovsky Castle; and the fame
 shortened, or lengthened off the page.
 since I'm a member of the same.
 while men, all sombre, all the same,
 the hapless Phrygians all the same,
 the Major's here: he's all the rage
 freezes my blood... Yet all the same,
 the leather rein, to learn the tale,
 that fired his soul, to burn the same;
 new depths of boredom.'' ``No, the same.
 some vote a doctor for the case,
 would on those evenings guess the fate
 of eloquence, and just the same
 now she's bereft, and just the same
 self-willed it may be just the same;
 and part in kindness? Just the same,
 Which one comes first? It's just the same
 you'd not so much as know the name,
 set off the ladies like a frame.
 and theirs was the poetic flame
 its natural right to rave and flare.
 of calm and reason, when the flame
 In languid silence, or the flame
 good-looking, in the flower of age,
 when not quite eighteen years of age.
 all this, at eighteen years of age,
 I was just thirteen years of age.
 looked down in an access of hate,
 earn for me the rewards of fame --
 had come to him in field and glade;
 for vanity, and din, and glare!...
 a soul of sympathy and grace,
 though some support it with good grace).
 apartment where a double glaze
 the coolness of the sombre glade,
 the days grew shorter, in the glade
 as he descended to the grave.
 and then, with an enchanting grace,
 swam on the river's dreaming face,
 parade before their mocking gaze
 a few books had escaped disgrace:
 The fields are dark, since evening came.
 fortunate one, he'd not disgrace;
 in loaded carriages, migrate,
 when galloping at headlong pace
 they sit, they cross themselves for grace.
 he'd see his soul cool in its grate;
 ``This is Vladimir Lensky's grave
 Tanya thanks each one with a phrase.
 her out-of-fashion turns of phrase,
 that there be just one voice which came,
 puts out the lamps; the whole brigade
 to ensure that till next time our image
 is tinsel on a life I hate;
 to all that's trivial and inane?
 exhausted and done up, I take
 lively, capricious, and inane...
 up the hillside at breakneck pace;
 he would have found a normal fate.
 the solitude of woods and tillage,
 impart such lessons as you please!
 He's gone away and left his village,
 and Grandison beyond compare,
 that in the usual Christmas scrimmage
 a poet, and a Kantian sage.
 fresh leaves... for such is heaven's mandate.
 Faublas'3 disciple for an age --
 ``Who would have thought it?'' ``What an age!''
 to aim, at steady, even pace
 Horace
 into the all&eacute;e, face to face,
 of our first meeting face to face,
 the men confront them, face to face:
 that your proud glance is sure to take!
 were placed across the gulf to make
 sigh, and stood up, began to pace;
 for what's been given us to take;
 a tempting plume for you to take?
 garden, a modest home, the place
 but in his songs kept pride of place
 a restless urge for change of place
 the grand monde finds it out of place.
 others prescribe a watering-place.
 from young Tatyana's dwelling-place,
 has made the park her brooding-place,
 that with him to the trysting-place
 still after many years in place.
 in our first ages), from no place
 had ruled out reading, in their place
 and portents of the lunar phase.
 in rural calm's most secret place!
 a flimsy bridge whose every quake
 Horses and coach are spliced in marriage;
 mountains are piled on every carriage,
 of tears will cloud her tender gaze.
 his pistols, laid them in their case,
 and stately periwigs, their fame.
 as scarlet heels have lost their name
 straightened his wig, and asked her name.
 Tanya pursued them with her gaze...
 did any glasses seek her face,
 with the grand general in her wake --
 too faint to stir a further pace:
 to pranks and jokes of earlier date.
 resigned disposal of your fate.
 adorned the sanctum of our sage.
 the entire story of your fate.
 watch for your smile, and catch your gaze
 fresh as a poppy-flower, your face.''
 with years no more to meet our gaze?
 that nubile maid of riper age,
 with demoiselles of riper age;
 they heap up silver with a spade;
 a vulgar touch. I can't translate.
 has lately wintered, just a space
 of pity for my wretched state,
 where every day a bloodstained shade
 maid-servants from the whole estate
 we were swept off, in reverie's haze,
 ``Sit down! how strange! it's like the stage
 to his mysterious tree the snake
 It's time to drop astern the shape
 each took four steps across the space,
 and yawn in silence at the stage
 alone across the fields of space,
 He saw the sad girl's trembling state,
 ``I close. I dread to read this page...
 just at this crisis of his gale,
 by calmly aiming at his pate
 become a joke to us, its game,
 shutters are up, and all is pale
 bear's gone; a hallway, no mistake;
 each object held a secret message
 of far-away Onegin's name.
 or novelties from fashion's page.
 though Menelaus, in Helen's name,
 homestead, before her parents' gaze,
 as was the old suspicious sage,
 in talk, so fruitless and so stale,
 Moscow has beauties and to spare:
 moment the assembly seemed to shake...
 ``But so it is: I'm in no state
 are entered here, in friendship's gage,
 what wings our first successes gave!
 just now of wrestling with his shade,
 for him a lofty stair. His shade,
 into the tomb's mysterious shade;
 Tanya is gripped. No comment's made
 my house, my evenings, all that state --
 was younger still, but at that stage
 with mournful sound the secret shade
 youth is a fever; we must spare
 in through the door, at swallow's pace,
 all modish foes dread worldly shame.
 to speak; believe me: of my shame
 when shall I start on my escape?
 not even in her earliest age;
 then afterwards, alone, at ease,
 of instant thoughts, a fleeting trace
 to meet his thirsty lips... What daze,
 her fingers shake, she doesn't dare
 is seized by Tambov's poet-sage;
 your night of fretting's left no trace!
 coquettishness has got no trace --
 ensconced beside the window-pane.
 his mother taps the window-pane.
 to do them all is easy game.
 looks at him with a steady gaze,
 has fixed on her a steady gaze.
 she can't escape at any pace --
 caressing breath has fanned my face
 a rambling walk beside my lake,
 and not a mention of my name...''
 value the hero of my tale,
 But from the hero of my tale,
 with this the hero of my tale:
 the toll of those borne off by fate!
 for swapping bullets with my mate.
 leave far behind that city-gate.
 like a true friend, to speak my name.
 would be allied to him by fate;
 poetry's sacred frenzy, made
 you'll never leave me to my fate.
 and I surrender to my fate.''
 for you have, at this early date,
 and yet your honour is my gage
 ``But there'll be such a rout and scrabble
 endorsed by fashionable rabble,
 with every different kind of rabble...''
 who never scorned the social rabble;
 cooked-up where garret-vermin babble,
 who never learnt how dreamers babble;
 a skeleton jerked by a cable,
 such crystalled scents as best are able
 now things are changed, now we resemble
 As far removed as they were able
 How early he'd learnt to dissemble,
 of jealousy, to seem to tremble
 and frames would shudder, windows tremble;
 years back, to call up many a fable;
 Prepared for prophecy and fable,
 a grammar, a digest of fable,
 to wreck a maiden's sleep with fable,
 that marble Nina's proved unable
 the charge that poets are unable
 has wished it an abrupt goodbye --
 Sometimes his tricks would earn him trouble,
 How early on he learnt to trouble
 bewitches Tanya... he is able
 piled books, and through the pane the sable
 Now that the British Muse is able
 ``What of them, Tanya? I was able,
 and in the bath-house had a table
 a group of monsters round a table,
 two cupboards, one divan, a table,
 Oak-floored, and simple as a stable:
 She sits with Nina8 at a table --
 the iron figure3 on the table,
 put back the libel on the table
 for hours, with elbows on the table --
 Porcelain and bronzes on the table,
 they needed kvas like air; at table
 of sunlight makes it flash and crumble,
 a block of snow will slip and tumble.
 or cause the bursting of his bubble,
 When out to burst a rival's bubble,
 on billiard-table rests a cue,
 Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;, the mediocre,
 their unattractive t&ecirc;te-&agrave;-t&ecirc;te;
 ``I know it all: my secret ache
 Tatyana had no dolls to dandle,
 Then in return for all this twaddle,
 recalling earlier loves, did we,
 our vessel's long been overdue.
 her journey home is overdue.
 and dinner with a touch of idle
 Evgeny's total store of knowledge
 Shall I depict with expert knowledge
 from her they strive to coax and coddle
 and in her grief seemed fit to die;
 am doomed to perish, yet to die
 True, scorn should punish and should bridle
 a steed responsive to the bridle,
 you've paid insanity its due.
 long, long ago... no, that could be
 how bold or bashful there, and here
 and cattle roamed the plain, and here
 the country's pretty stupid here!
 ``Today he promised he'd be here,''
 moved and surprised, she stays serene,
 no paradise can stay serene.
 closely embraced, in wending here,
 sits with Limburg's vivacious cheese
 his pup to grace the sledge, while he
 where he was master of his college,
 where the prize-boy of fashion's college
 with cause that I've recalled them here.
 I keep them, and will quote them here:
 penates, came to cast an eye
 is with dull trash that can't cohere:
 What trifling could be more complete?
 here a weak version, incomplete,
 lest in forgetfulness complete
 drew scrutiny no less complete --
 of plains where boredom reigns complete,
 where her security's complete.
 of listening like a judge-supreme
 men made their bows, and sought her eye;
 folly for me to interfere
 reader, by painting you a scene
 that king of the satiric scene,
 no brilliant truth, no vivid scene;
 ``How long has he been on the scene?
 Olga's appeared upon the scene,
 But to the garden, to the scene
 had once before, across the scene
 he knew too well that sort of scene.
 he saw that, as in cities, here
 the bear explains: ``my cousin's here --
 beneath the stone reposes here,
 and nameless rivulet, that scene
 Pikht&iacute;n, of the Hussars, was here;
 not only by Evgeny's eye;
 with young Semy&oacute;nova,9 and there
 then suddenly she's off, and there
 who sets me snoring then and there --
 Onegin's soul encountered there
 her drops of tears, and seated there,
 peopled my sleep, and to their theme
 of the cotillion's endless theme
 to pass the time was Eugene's theme:
 his French valet, Guillot, is there
 Saint Petersburg's fine flower was there --
 unspeaking, too, but stretched out there
 three pairs of handsome ones - yet there
 felicitously every theme,
 Onegin - now once more my theme --
 There's vacancies in plenty there.''
 when in the park, in the all&eacute;e
 have each asked him to a soir&eacute;e:
 broke greetings off, and gave Eugene
 Zaretsky bit his lip. Eugene
 girls' tears, their swooning, for Eugene
 and Lensky follows her... Eugene,
 and all into the salon squeeze,
 where Tanya now confronts Eugene.
 No doubt about it, it's Eugene.
 of whispering woods where my Eugene,
 and where's her sister now? and where,
 And if she happened anywhere
 from whom he'd kept a letter, where
 the faces met with everywhere;
 pursue his pencil. Everywhere
 its own perfection everywhere,
 of modish belles the modish foe,
 bored by success' giddy trifle,
 I can see naught, as Hymen's foe,
 found that in laughter yawns could stifle:
 to infuriate a clumsy foe;
 a carving-knife - and in the tangle
 Louder and louder sounds the wrangle:
 already high in treason's league!
 Now hear the friends in dialogue:
 unhesitating from her tongue,
 your early life, unlock your tongue:
 to cool my glances and my tongue,
 already studying to intrigue,
 sings as he plaits a humble shoe.
 what have your wits to do with me?
 his Sunday game of cards with me.
 and stoves with tiles of various hue.
 her darling foot of its wet shoe,
 a slipper, or a magazine?
 he'd pop the poison in his chalice!
 was his; we'd both drunk passion's chalice:
 since then my heart was wrenched aside;
 barrels, and then to drive aside
 in her once more has come alive.
 there waited for us both the malice
 Yet sweeter far, at such a time,
 and felt himself love's invalide.
 by two small oaktrees in a ride.
 with three roan horses in a line
 and yet by Vergil or Racine
 just like a shadow, or a wife.
 what traps he'd set him, with what malice
 beloved friend, thou art my bride!''
 To private tastes we each subscribe:
 the horror of disgrace and crime,
 may then amuse my glad decline.
 until Br&eacute;guet's unsleeping chime
 bestirred himself, was devilish active!
 no beauties of a foreign clime,
 he found Tatyana so attractive,
 of something vague, some misty clime;
 grew hardened to life's frosty clime;
 raised nose and shoulders high and wide
 summits of aspen, birch and lime,
 the fools who sparkle far and wide,6
 of every funeral far and wide;
 is yawned away with friends and wife
 of sighs, and compliments, and fire;
 we have to cherish and admire
 such good and sensible advice;
 At least I'll give him some advice:
 ranges, Lenora2-like, she'd ride
 relined and strengthened for the drive;
 a novel on the established line
 he'll take you prisoner, you'll admire
 And now the door is opened wide,
 she won't inhale the powdered rime,
 the idol that she'll most admire
 nothing could alter or could tire
 and at the very self-same time
 where civil treacheries are rife,
 befitting such a noble pile:
 the best revenge one could desire.
 my declaration may give rise!
 of boiling youth did I desire
 she sits down calmly on one side,
 and hate with malice; he whose life
 gentlemanly, quite precise,
 his mind, so cold and so precise.
 is all those stubborn lips desire!
 the murmuring Nereids recite,
 but youthful, virgin hearts derive
 the full fruit of her heart's desire;
 The bitterness was mine - the ice
 Tatyana groaned above the tide;
 sang for the guests above the wine;
 jealousy's flame, to light desire;
 let's go where, winding all the time
 he's moved... you see him from the side.''
 their joyous way across the ice;
 to institute a new regime.
 a brook flows through a grove of lime.
 secret sledge-rides in verse of fire;
 in twilight of all&eacute;es of lime.
 won't benefit these guts of mine.''
 Onegin looks with eyes of fire:
 He sang of grief and parting-time,
 no matter: hope, in child's disguise,
 past the grand ladies, see her glide;
 bursts with cold envy and with bile?
 and daily scenes of modish life
 his epigrams topped up with bile.
 No feast, no welcome-gifts - with fire
 whose heart on dreams was wont to thrive,
 girls' albums, signed in blood for choice;
 to be respected all through life:
 the glare, the fumes in which I live,
 youth's choice, the flower of French cuisine:
 Such feckless passion - as I live,
 there'll be a fight. For that I give
 would launch into self-sacrifice;
 why fight what's known to be decisive?
 forty years long would criticise
 A man who's active and incisive
 a grey-haired, perfumed exquisite,
 with any torture so exquisite
 encore Mo&euml;na,7 - and rejoice
 how sad the scar of passion's knife:
 his children and his faithful wife,
 yourself too long from social life.''
 all point at her, and all combine
 is either the distrait Vampire,
 and in a singsong voice confide
 the inmost thoughts that girls can hide.
 for she was bored by laughs and noise
 for tempests and for feasts and noise;
 thumps as the balls are pressed inside
 there gathered at the coffin-side
 this soul that glowed with virgin fire.
 doubts, to exhaust the heart, then fire
 and he was bored with social noise;
 that I'm just longing to indite --
 left her to follow her own line,
 across the years to our own time.
 the lies that in the press run rife,
 the youth of those past days in line
 perfidious blow to my inside,
 have vanished, like an empty noise,
 I love you (what's the use to hide
 had only debts on which to live.
 and with no post, no work, no wife,
 and wore his dressing-gown to dine.
 a patriot, a cosmopolite,
 promptly had nothing left to give.
 no noise of gaiety, no time
 for honour, a straightforward pride.
 and taken by the French - some prize! --
 Clarissa, Julie, or Delphine6 --
 &lt; amongst the soulless men of pride,
 with Eugene proved a tempting prize.
 smiles, and a maiden's tranquil poise,
 that stretched from Romulus in his prime
 the morning after, a surprise
 ambassador?'' In some surprise
 or, with an epigram-surprise,
 bigot or prude? or has he quite
 6 Gentleman, squire.
 with all our hearts, and who require
 to hear what latest modes require,
 the heavenly lights in glorious quire
 (for which he must receive due praise).
 and I'll be true to him, for life.''
 is this then what you can't forgive?
 In winter, when for longer time
 I'll end my tale some other time.
 to help her from the other side;
 as did the general at her side.
 Tatyana, lonely heroine,
 and manners of an earlier time.
 advises him of dinner-time.
 with heart that's grown unused to praise,
 the climacteric of our life,
 is out of fashion in our time.
 I never lived or wrote for praise;
 who all his life would garner praise
 like fields in spring when storms arrive.
 at last the final hours arrive.
 Chapter Five
 4 See note 1 to Chapter Five.
 Notes to Chapter Five
 yet how I wish that I might raise
 poetic dreams, a brighter fire.
 for her, no joy from winter-time,
 by sighs of passion or by praise.
 and for a chuckle or a smile.
 beside unfinished lines, a suite
 a girl or two, without a smile
 his destiny) without a smile
 that I prefer to Champagne's tide;
 to bellow out: ``she's mine, she's mine.''
 Enough I've wandered in the suite
 coated with a thin layer of spite.
 the war, the snowfall, and his wife.
 and with his dinner, and his wife.
 and dutifully shared his life
 far more than most who leave this life.
 has found an end before his time.
 the sad beginnings of his life
 always contented with his life,
 youthful, who ripened in his time,
 where are the reveries this time,
 had nothing to employ his life.
 they don't deserve what they inspire
 will the benighted reason smile,
 already tends too much to smile
 are bound, by every virtuous wife,
 that, though polite, was clear as ice.
 scarcely recalled their love, their spite;
 but I've become another's wife --
 emboldened by his Olga's smile,
 Vladimir Lensky. Quick, let's dine!
 his virulence that made you smile,
 boy-tribes with skates on loudly slice
 to wreak, by stirring Lensky's ire,
 pure passion's flame, and in a trice
 to Moscow settled in a trice.
 and I'll be thirty in a trice?
 her youth with all his repertoire
 Can it be true, it won't come twice --
 the new moon, horned, on her left side,
 No, never in the hottest fire
 to where he came to her that time
 thinking: he loved me, and in strife
 and put them on a paced-out site.
 feelings he valued - from outside.
 and found her dreams, her secret fire,
 I could describe here his attire;
 the usurers' voracious tribe.
 nor crawled in suppliant attire.
 Tatyana in low-cut attire
 someone like you and me, just nice?
 not cold, but also not effusive,
 she was unhurried, unobtrusive,
 conversing in a singsong voice;
 to know the audience hears his voice.
 The evening passes, and meanwhile
 galop, mazurka, waltz... Meanwhile
 and wasted life's fine flower meanwhile.
 not even by chance, once in a while,
 he even dares, once in a while,
 to crack between them; for a while
 proficiency to speak and write,
 roofs, flowerbeds, fences, all in white,
 but madrigals I've got to write!
 this very day I'd gladly give,
 to gentlemen on every side
 8 August Lafontaine (1758-1851), German novelist of family life.
 I'm much afraid that bilberry wine
 ``But tell me who she is.'' ``My wife.''
 a pretty girl exactly like
 Friend of my heart, be at my side,
 breakneck by moonlight at my side!
 fresh from the cot, an infant pickle,
 scarce out of bibs, already fickle,
 he laughs - they all begin to chuckle;
 He nods - they start to fuss and truckle;
 death on his brow, your friend should lie,
 Hm, hm. Distinguished reader, tell me
 is this the riddle's missing clue?
 and all the works of Fontanelle16 --
 And here my sentiments impel me
 the sky is brilliant in its blue
 set to well-known children's glee:
 ``r&eacute;veillez-vous, belle endormie.''
 Deserving object: there can be
 to the circle of our dance.
 of a provincial ing&eacute;nue,
 a stall, a kitchen and a fence.
 by flickering past us like a fence.
 and no one's ear could take offence
 no boy, to fight or take offence --
 with irresistible refulgence,
 raised a dull eye to moon's refulgence,
 now dazzled by one thing's effulgence,
 for him, at night, before the indulgence
 &lt; that there existed, for the indulgence
 Spoilt by the habit of indulgence,
 Faces before him flash and change
 nothing more lovable than he.
 An unknown yard, she sees from thence,
 but I refuse to chop or change.
 across the Baltic in exchange
 to life and hope with just a glance --
 there was a softness in his glance:
 The censor's tribute, I'll arrange:
 of recompense beyond endurance,
 for wood and tallow; all the range
 with The Well-Meaner10 on her knee?
 or else disturb my mournful trance
 at first she had no heart to range;
 it brought back Tanya from her trance.
 It fascinates by its assurance
 All who behold him find him strange.
 but then she found their choice was strange.
 at such vivacious, free good sense.
 and mileposts grip the idle sense
 the man of honour and of sense.
 here there's no conscience, here no sense;
 was his absorption in their sense.
 where's the high aim, the ardent sense
 as helpmeet in my sad existence,
 Farewell to you, my free existence!
 gay nature and its sparkling distance!
 Without romance, or false insistence,
 more joy still when with mute insistence
 of youth, so tender, so intense?
 purport of other lines; intense
 from any gentlemanly distance;
 here's boredom, madness or pretence,
 his gaze at Tatyana alone --
 dumb I must perish, and alone.
 what can one do? as said above,
 a lyre, and on it perched, a dove --
 whom shall we never find a bore?
 had chased me to the world above.''
 daytimes and evenings passed alone?
 ``I am in love; leave me alone.''
 all blend into Eugene alone.
 a place for rest. Eugene alone
 and where Terpsichore alone
 of the whole world, her nurse alone,
 in ink with colour-wash above;
 No tearstains, nothing. Wrath alone
 the season which is such a bore --
 to come back to the hall alone
 each moral puts us in a doze,
 you're all in fever... heavens above.''
 vexation? vainness? heavens above,
 that mediocre dress alone
 ``Tanya's no child - it's past a joke,''
 as in the nook he'd sit alone
 ``where master used to sit alone.
 then I'd have looked for you alone
 whisper repeated to the crone.
 ``And here's the hearth,'' explains the crone,
 and in a corner make him choke
 together they arrived, and none
 one raves in verse like me, and one
 of tales of girls, and ghosts, and lore:
 for Satan, love's a splendid joke.
 with work at home; but when he'd gone,
 in secret judgement what he'd done,
 frightened to death a timid love,
 amazement: ``Where's your second gone?''
 and in her unconsidered note
 young Tanya first appeared to me,
 dreamt of reproving what they'd done:
 could they not laugh out loud, before
 are coloured in a single tone,
 in a melodious, flute-like tone.
 then he began to talk once more
 its image, then to swoon before
 and every night shares her repose.
 3 See Chapter Three, note 13.
 they'd settled that some years before.
 I do, I do. Well, where's he gone?''
 torment of pride? And why's he come?
 the deeper in the wood, the more
 ages we'd never heard of love:
 6 Slavonic god of love.
 of Olga: love's that kind of bore!
 of its unvarnished monochrome.
 ``Command me, darling, as you choose.''
 her soul was waiting... for someone.
 by blazing fireplace, and intone
 for happiness - that alien role.
 ``Nurse, I'm not ill; I... I'm in love.''
 Nasce una gente a cui 'l morir non dole.
 Of Lensky's fate they said no more --
 pointed each year, for time to come,
 to me her best in-quarto tome,
 The ploughman there delights to doze,
 on tragedy; but it's no joke,
 your words, and in my soul to explore
 has hardly mastered postal prose.
 it can't be youth's distemper - love?
 Since when is this?'' ``Two years or more.''
 (if you'll turn back to chapter one)
 ``Abandon hope for evermore.''9
 Eugene takes Olga, and is gone;
 for men to see, still in the scope
 is graven on that face of stone.
 was far from happy with his role.
 2 ``See the descriptions of the Finnish winter in Baratynsky's Eda''. Pushkin's note.
 3 ``"Tomcat calls Kit" - a song foretelling marriage.'' Pushkin's note.
 3 ``Sweet-sounding Greek names like Agathon... etc., are only current in Russia among the common people.'' Pushkin's note.
 9 ``Lasciate ogni speranza, voi ch'entrate. Our modest author has translated only the first part of the famous verse.'' Pushkin's note.
 foretells for her some wondrous role;
 right in the flower of joyous hope,
 revive it with another shove --
 will disappear as fast as smoke:
 I kept in mind an ancient store
 the fleeting tenderness that stole
 until this day, a lady's love
 such frank tendresse; away they stole
 their hands are dipped in scarlet gore,
 that's the morass, I beg you note,
 still filled with Eugene, Tanya wrote,
 too pale, too thin, but on the whole
 how well she'd studied her new role!
 dogged by one feeling, only one --
 Chapter One
 the highest circles are a bore.
 in deepest grasses, quite alone,
 the units are ourselves alone.
 they took offence at this, and broke
 is dressed, undressed, and dressed once more?
 he stalked the drawing-rooms, remote
 Notes to Chapter One
 is mincing manners - nothing more.
 taken your place, though not your throne?
 That's when I'll sit down to compose
 from ball to bed behold him come;
 old Uncle's end was soon to be.
 and, with it, forced renown to come --
 from Boston's cloth or gossip's quote;
 Parisian taste invents for one --
 self-portraits only - furthermore
 for unmeant kindness - how he shone!
 1 ``Written in Bessarabia.'' Pushkin's note.
 17 ``Written at Odessa.'' Pushkin's note.
 4 ``Well-known restaurateur.'' Pushkin's note.
 18 ``The author, on his mother's side, is of African descent...'' Pushkin's note.
 you were the first ones he forswore;
 lend ears to my lugubrious tone:
 what it's transported to our shore
 relations off, and never spoke.
 Let others learn from his example!
 But God, how deadly dull to sample
 the all&eacute;e to the lake, the copse;
 far from it! just one more collapse.''
 12 Constantinople.
 that moment, of a luscious pie
 on points that all long since agree --
 Riding on the lugubrious prairie?
 but you'll undoubtedly agree
 the coachmen ring the fire, and curse
 sits imperturbable, and free.
 now sensitive, and now carefree,
 show me the sense. Divine decree
 who can combine it with the free
 Five versts or so from Krasnog&oacute;rie,
 Now, to my cost it may be true
 He destined Olga's hand for me,
 and not without a sigh, perforce
 whose memory will preserve for me
 From his first youth he'd known the force,
 Tatyana's rites are not for me.
 ``Enough, stand up. It's now for me
 my tedious taste for feeling free.
 each springtime, on the growing tree,
 come to the fields, my friends! To horse!
 he leaves the house, calls for his horse
 sets out upon her homeward course;
 its winds had blown him far off course.
 and magic nights. In headlong course
 so, cursing women's devious course,
 am always glad to write, it's true,
 ourselves on our landfall. It's true,
 A sorry state of things, it's true!
 him prove it, writing after me.''
 Chapter Three
 Notes to Chapter Three
 to drain, on credit, bottles three.
 5 Girl in Zhukovsky's poem who practises divination, with frightening results. See note 2 to Chapter Three.
 allow no rest to you or me;
 of ranks and ages so diverse.
 when we begin to talk of verse);
 of oligarchical converse,
 prepares himself; and then his verse,
 the horses fidget worse and worse;
 compact of amorous trash, and worse,
 even in our names (and how much worse
 at feasts, was strong and fancy-free?
 bright Northern Cleopatra she:
 ``The house, the park... I'll go and see!''
 of love's anxiety. Blessed is he
 or else, from far off, he could see
 yet dared not trust what I could see.
 took her to his estate, where she,
 light dreams for new ones... so we see
 perhaps, though Phoebus warns, I'll see
 by the cold world's corrupt finesse;
 I've no one here who comprehends me,
 and now a swooning mind attends me,
 Onegin too - and there to see,
 kept asking: "shall I live to see"...''
 becomes a horse for all to see;
 at first, with God knows whom to see,
 and put his glasses on to see
 then quietly at last says she:
 ``who loves you more than I, let's see
 and obstinate his look. But she
 all in a blaze, I said: it's he!
 I hear you say. But can you see
 Now here's a letter, as you see,
 him far enough through wild and waste.
 for dreams, or journalistic battle,
 would cause widespread remark and tattle,
 my husband for his wounds in battle
 a vivid brush, a witty rattle --
 Malfil&acirc;tre
 of love so timorous and gentle.
 But ours, whatever he might be,
 forward or back? it's true that he
 through baseness of the soul that he,
 Was it to no effect that he,
 Evgeny read the sad epistle
 a passer-by; and on tiptoe
 and set off prompter than a whistle
 that soul without a moral tie,
 and, under, ``toute &agrave; vous Annette'';
 ours was no Grandison - not he.
 yes, focus on them your lorgnette,
 And every minute his lorgnette
 and an insouciant lorgnette.
 and glumly serves the medicine bottle,
 Freed from its dripping cork, the bottle
 solemn, too long compelled to throttle
 And the sly baseness, fit to throttle,
 I'm terrified - so let it be...
 The hall is full of noise and hustle,
 there's yap of pugs, and laughs, and bustle;
 and set on hating the coquette,
 the peaceful Muses' devotee,
 it was goodbye, Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;.
 He goes inside, corpse-like of feature...
 that, meanwhile, pinched and glum of feature,
 And so, at last, feature by feature,
 Reflection was her friend and pleasure
 From all sweet things that gave me pleasure,
 But now, in this vindictive pleasure
 on her smug face a flush of pleasure.
 Friends, how my heart would leap with pleasure
 I regularly take much pleasure
 by moonlight two young girls took pleasure,
 his converse gave Onegin pleasure;
 thank you for sorrow and for pleasure,
 or servants waiting on her pleasure.
 But in misfortune or displeasure,
 there any friend of harmless pleasure
 with jealousy beyond all measure
 And then, to part us in full measure,
 the secret of her husband's measure,
 so it was not in any measure,
 Who is there who will truly measure
 He was convinced, a kindred creature
 more thoroughly, thank God, the creature
 the hall's without a living creature,
 Thank you for all the gifts I treasure,
 Whom then to credit? Whom to treasure?
 when suddenly I saw this treasure
 over the Petersburg pav&eacute; --
 stood in the door, cherubic, mute,
 were all the law that I would use;
 (on orders which of course presume
 but, nurse, you see... Oh, don't refuse...''
 to the first meanings of his flute.
 come in and warm yourself a minute!''
 could I accept for just a minute
 O flowers, and love, and rustic leisure,
 time was, in evening hours of leisure,
 their table, and their hours of leisure?
 she found, in labours and in leisure,
 she calls down curses on their leisure,
 it touched with reverie her leisure,
 The place where Eugene loathed his leisure
 ready to share our quiet leisure
 tranquillity, and solitude --
 Godfearing folk will institute
 that all of Russia can't contribute
 beneath, a brook rolls its tribute
 one pair! I pay them memory's tribute
 but now it bores me every minute.
 1 Vasily Levshin (1746-1826), writer on gardening and agriculture.
 inside the Larins' house fell mute.
 that thievish mouths cannot consume
 dons of Epicurean rule,
 your matchlessness, to seek to capture
 From hour to hour a surer capture
 the circumstances of his capture
 She folds the page, lays down the plume.,
 it's also true, in battle's rapture,
 his soul to a delicious rapture
 your feet, to pale and waste... what rapture!
 an inn at each stage of the route.
 slave of the service, was en route.
 Elle &eacute;tait fille, elle &eacute;tait amoureuse.
 reflection or provoked dispute:
 his song was limpid in its tune
 with the pink glow the snows assume
 I introduced my saucy Muse
 From here, deep-sunk in pensive woe,
 consequences of hideous woe;
 he read of course the sceptic Bayle15
 and country stillness: there the lyre
 the strain of Tasso's octave-rhyme!
 the youthful votary of rhyme
 I need to rest from all this rhyme:
 I own it: tender Parny's12 rhyme
 the girls sing out the ancient rhyme:
 love's melting dreams shall fill my rhyme,
 he killed eight years in such a style,
 that even so my wretched style
 in sensible old-fashioned style.
 unnoticed, in unseeing style,
 enough of my loquacious lyre:
 he charged three roubles and a half,
 yet, truthfully and not in chaff,
 and took two Petriads in calf,
 upon the side of the distaff --
 that was less clever still by half.
 just as the Poet15 paints himself.
 could see no harm in books; himself
 is forced to crucify himself,
 and leant upon the granite shelf;
 he never took one from the shelf,
 odd volumes from the devil's shelf,
 or pining, Olga's hours were brief.
 of Morpheus had induced relief
 as I have... learn from my belief
 she once had pined in girlish grief,
 that inexperience leads to grief.''
 his sweetheart faithful to her grief.
 their cloaks; Zaretsky's measured off
 at Cleopatra, hiss her off,
 And now the two opponents doff
 who'll clap an entrechat, or scoff
 4 Serfs chosen as recruits for the army had their forelock cut off.
 in a peaked cap, all dust and fluff, --
 and in flat calm I've found the stuff
 now even Didelot's tedious stuff.''
 where in the heart of silence rang
 of many distant lands he sang
 of time between the wolf and dog.)
 what's in them? All this loud parading,
 reader, we must be separating,
 meantime she'd give the maids a beating
 a general of majestic bearing
 He finds the shock beyond all bearing:
 Love's frantic torments went on beating
 a sharp-nailed paw towards her; bracing
 Elated by the music's blaring,
 in you a tender pulse was beating,
 and radiate a rainbow: blazing
 the towers of whitestone Moscow beaming
 One melancholy fop, declaring
 By now the rays of spring are chasing
 over the slush, where is he chasing?
 But it's the talent for concealing
 that, artless, and without concealing,
 we'll keep love's price appreciating,
 behind deceit or double-dealing?)
 over the business of leave-taking,
 Neighbours in whispered tones are taking
 and though to do so would be daring,
 She's dressed since dawn, dead pale; debating,
 Then, after midday he'll be waking;
 I'll catalogue each simple saying
 here's tea that Olga's been preparing;
 that she's ``ideal'', begins preparing
 and all this flashy masquerading,
 night of the second, started flaking.
 More wine, he calls, to drench the flaming
 may spend a century in flaying
 scarlet with passion's instant flaring,
 have snorted, reared, and whitely foaming
 before a fire too slowly flaming,
 the third day, wood and hill and grazing
 that poisonous worm, despised, degrading,
 shadows that flit behind the glazing
 the clink of rowels, met his hearing;
 before you on the ground, unhearing,
 While Lensky'd long been meditating
 ``By virtue of procrastinating
 she holds a letter up, and leaning
 that from the backdoor he'd be leaving
 in quilted coat, where rays were gleaming
 nor from the bath-house roof be clearing
 So, like Childe Harold, glum, unpleasing,
 stirred at your gaze, so strange, so gleaming,
 From violent passions fast pulsating
 he wakes; a bath where ice is floating;
 In summertime - for he was leading
 one customary object gleaming,
 The house is packed out; scintillating,
 But now they're near. Already gleaming
 how proudly, how divinely gleaming,
 and Paris too. But hear my pleading:
 and, on my bed-head gently leaning,
 a fisher's fire. Through country gleaming
 set off our troubled mind comparing
 that strikes him with such force and meaning?
 with love and comfort in your meaning,
 still hardly opened up, from fading.''
 it's new to us, beyond gainsaying;
 No one will think that worth gainsaying,
 she's nearly swooned, she's suffocating;
 if, motionless, no life appearing,
 Tatyana's husband, now appearing...
 I'll stop that tempter from depraving
 and tell of children's plighted playing
 Bubbles like Hippocrene are spraying;
 For such am I. When you were speaking
 and ``what's your name?'' she asks him, speaking
 the foes, cold-blooded and unspeaking,
 affected pose - and an unspeaking
 once, with its foaming and its playing,
 a scream rings out... the cabin's quaking...
 All sleep: from the saloon a roaring
 it was quite torn in half and breaking.
 believes in her elected dreaming
 how sensuously her eyes are dreaming!
 What happened? Though his eyes were reading,
 he murmurs: ``Olga's mine for saving;
 embodied by the power of dreaming,
 after your drive, it's quite back-breaking;
 be good enough to go on reading:
 perpetually, one goal for dreaming,
 She dreamt of portents. In her dreaming
 silver with moonlight, in her dreaming
 Shot through below the chest - and streaming
 through gloom and mist; and there came streaming
 He lay quite still, and strange as dreaming
 started a life of pointless roaming,
 the barbs that envy's always spreading,
 and everything around was dreaming,
 is sad old moon's... Hark! snow is creaking...
 a far-flung traveller who was creaking
 only the pallor of heart-breaking
 Mushrooms in brine, for winter eating,
 you'd made appearance in my dreaming;
 respect, and mercy for my dreaming.
 Dressed like - --,14 duly dreading
 or else does nature, fresh and staring,
 council, and with profound head-shaking
 Tatyana flushed, and started shaking.
 her bosom heaves, her cheeks are staring
 ``the mail explains the time he's taking.''
 to his Tatyana, yes, he's racing,
 it melts, away it rushes, racing
 The storm is over,5 dawn is paling,
 to draw a breath, around her staring
 Tatyana looks with pulses racing
 time was when morning's breeze was swaying
 and growing thicker; then, heart-shaking,
 There was a pine-branch downward straying
 above the water started tracing
 He mounts the sledge, with daylight fading:
 But while she roams in thought, not caring
 no glance so sweet, no sigh so teasing,
 in all its mystery. Hymen's teasing,
 beyond a doubt, its wondrous tracing
 log cabin a pretentious-teasing
 Petushk&oacute;v, local Paris, tearing,
 and thus our race, so fluctuating,
 Hurrah! let's start congratulating
 He's flown to Talon's,4 calculating
 for grumbling, gossiping and swearing
 it's my profession; he was wearing --
 his life till dawn's already making,
 So down came Tanya, hardly daring
 Next day Tatyana, early waking,
 Tanya (profoundly Russian being,
 once more that touch is fiercely troubling
 the utter virtue of their being,
 or simply bow: within her being
 the bliss that fills me when your throbbing,
 a suite of elegies that, throbbing,
 in the expression of its being,
 How heavy, and how near to sobbing,
 So you, inspired Yaz&yacute;kov,4 sobbing
 as if beneath her, dark and rumbling,
 through him is sweetness' self. In grumbling
 as from their luscious hive go tumbling
 Chairs are pushed outward, loudly rumbling,
 fancies once more are hotly bubbling,
 audacious tunnels will be marching:
 and iron bridges will go arching
 They've missed Eugene's completed etching.
 he had conveyed some moral teaching,
 outside the house. But you'll be aching
 to whom, in a fine flow of preaching,
 But she who modelled for the sketching
 the hour was late. And now from aching
 was stripped away, and mists encroaching
 their southward flight: one saw approaching
 ``oh, quit your stale, your tedious quacking,
 will in my soul be hushed and dying.
 ``Tell me, what's your companion doing?''
 Uncle, in bed, and near to dying,
 no time to pick it up - she's dying
 So went his sermon. Almost dying,
 that's the refrain that you should sing,
 What fate is my tomorrow brewing?
 a hermit's life - he'd be proceeding
 It's over. Supper is proceeding.
 but piteous he, the all-foreseeing,
 I know your heart: it has a feeling
 shocked by their modish pride, and fleeing
 her love obeys the laws of feeling,
 allows her hand, that's lost all feeling,
 hate, love, joy, sorrow - every feeling,
 neighbours in high content are wheezing;
 Only from Tanya's heart, no cheering --
 He sees: in slush, stretched out and keeping
 of one sole thought holds him in keeping
 Alas for him! there was no keeping
 the shades of night within their keeping
 ``You're ill, God have you in his keeping,
 into a modish tyrant's keeping
 he consecrated to my keeping?...
 Evgeny! ``Ah!'' Tatyana, fleeting
 There came a murmur, for a fleeting
 with lines to mark where they were sleeping...
 and stops his doleful heart from sleeping:
 as if she'd been profoundly sleeping,
 motionless as one soundly sleeping
 is softly, indolently sleeping,
 light as a shadow, shuns a meeting,
 ``I noticed once, at our chance meeting,
 Then what resulted from the meeting?
 For cousins from afar, on meeting
 what came from this unlooked-for meeting;
 Smiling through sleep, nature is meeting
 about one thing, till our next meeting.
 And yet, although it's past conveying,
 a word or two, or stare unseeing,
 Tatyana leaves Onegin kneeling,
 The banquet's given no cause for sneezing,
 Each one by now is badly needing
 a story that still wants completing;
 inns don't exist; but in a freezing
 and all is lost beyond retrieving;
 desires and dreams and griefs were breeding
 the infant year with cheerful greeting:
 on visits to us, and in greeting
 at heart by grim remorse's freezing.
 that lady the hostess was greeting,
 the pain, the grief, the marrow-freezing
 there never fails a kindly greeting,
 is this the man that you were seeking?
 These figures from the world of seeming,
 And all grandmothers who are listening
 just yesterday.'' ``And since your christening
 Why is Tatyana guiltier-seeming?
 What power enslaves you, with your seeming
 ``Now march.'' And calmly, not yet seeking
 in Russian winters thrilled at seeing
 Giving his pistol-butt a squeezing,
 the answer's past all human viewing,
 her sacred store of bliss and weeping
 on my untimely urn be weeping,
 Tatyana dear, with you I'm weeping:
 I'm near to sobbing, near to weeping!...''
 Poor Lensky! Set aside for weeping,
 hunts cheeky flies, with swatter sweeping,
 one wallows in delicious weeping;
 There too, he honoured, hotly weeping,
 ``Why, Tanya, what...?'' ``All's dull and trifling.
 and some were even testifying
 ``I can't sleep, nyanya: it's so stifling!
 my thoughtless pen has stopped designing,
 that queen of secrets and of sighing.
 inspires your lute to sounds of sighing?
 the level tenor of his going,
 Now Tanya's groaning, now she's sighing;
 of solitude, and peace abiding!
 her worth (but anathematising
 but I perhaps will be declining
 lies bright, and vast beyond perceiving;
 At first they called; but on perceiving
 had fortune blest me by prescribing
 ``Could I be happy circumscribing
 No madrigals were for inscribing
 all was material for transcribing:
 ``My dearest heart, you're sick and ailing.''
 The north wind blows, the clouds are driving --
 Since dawn, whole families have been driving
 Evgeny waits: and here comes driving,
 flows and reverberates. Reciting,
 his style breathed love, and not the gibing
 and where the husband, recognizing
 he steers her, nonchalantly gliding,
 is death, not pain. So gently gliding
 Already now the talk was thriving
 ``Tell me, our neighbours, are they thriving?
 magic of sleep had started claiming
 when Br&eacute;guet's chime is heard proclaiming
 and wakened Lensky by exclaiming:
 each news of her he'd been imbibing --
 and in it boldly I'm confiding''...
 he stoops and, tenderly confiding,
 was still mysterious and enticing --
 and gallops. Pistols made for pairing
 towards the Larins' and arriving
 She dropped... ``It's he! Eugene arriving!
 gripped him no more; soon they were raising
 They laugh. The guests begin arriving.
 his collar in its beaver braiding
 ``I dread your stern regard surmising
 your dashing one, is she surviving?''
 of hope is somehow still surviving
 then, country evening fast arriving,
 now golden autumn's just arriving.
 a calculation past despising --
 for shame and fear my wits are sliding...
 ``The morning star will soon be shining,
 They're settled in; and crawling, sliding,
 I write, my heart has ceased its pining,
 meanwhile the local Cyclops, aiming
 a saucy kib&iacute;tka is slicing
 And all the while the moon was shining
 He sweetened up with fancy's icing
 Vladimir drops, hand softly sliding
 and duck get up; with instant timing,
 and with its feeble glow outlining
 calls out his name... All unavailing:
 Hours pass; no answer; waiting, waiting.
 the gallery claps - it's bored with waiting --
 Zaretsky, engineer-in-waiting,
 Vladimir shuts the book, for writing
 ``I am in love,'' Tatyana's wailing
 that there his friend Kav&eacute;rin's5 waiting;
 We too shall find our hour is waiting;
 its furrow through the powdery icing;
 and your alas-ing and alack-ing
 dead ash sets no more sparks a-flying;
 just sentries to each other calling,
 is calling us, for ever calling --
 when night patrol's a perilous calling;
 In fact one day a note came flying
 By now the shades of night are flying,
 by mist of tears, without replying
 our Mother Eve: we're never falling
 urbane betrayals, and the chilling
 he struggled to bite back the chilling
 She looks: forgotten past all chalking
 amongst devout coquettes, appalling
 gossip, and tricks, and the patrolling
 then night comes on; the moon's patrolling
 and there at large he goes patrolling
 now ten has struck, his wheels are rolling,
 sets a sonorous cadence rolling --
 and captive girls, by Salgir20 lying.
 Meanwhile, attired for morning strolling
 tribute of tears, applause's shrilling,
 to Eugene all was new and thrilling;
 Silence was everywhere enthralling;
 But he's mistaken: Eugene's lying
 to lift her skirt up; still she's flying,
 Two weeks the matchmaker was plying
 Once more he counts the hour-bells tolling,
 yes, in that spring-time, in low-lying
 a riding whip. Tanya keeps walking...
 the merchant's up, the cabman's walking
 there zerov8 shared the unwilling
 through heaven's expanse serenely flying,
 still coughing, hissing, clapping, champing;
 of gossip, and set comment humming
 his news has set the party humming!
 to drop all that old-fashioned mumming;
 she trembles, and with fever drumming
 the audience still is busy stamping,
 and there, love's protestations, binding
 each in tumultuous turn descending
 Now he's returned, what role's he dancing?
 among the guests a general dinning:
 behind her followed wildly dancing;
 There you're entirely sure of finding
 His visitor from the beginning
 he takes her to a chair, beginning
 And now there's gradually beginning
 maiden in this superb, unthinking
 stare hard at her before exchanging
 spurs of Chevalier Gardes are clinking,
 incendiary looks are slinking,
 bottles to which some pitch is clinging:
 No, I was born for peace abounding
 ``The peasants there have wealth abounding,
 Three whole hours, at the least accounting,
 (that half-pay archivist); and bounding
 in goods and fame!'' But the sad-sounding
 &lt; Petushk&oacute;v's nails and spurs are sounding
 has voices that are more resounding,
 listless, impatient, for the pounding
 giddy as Venus when she's mounting
 They sing; unmoved by their sweet-sounding
 Whatever for caprice of spending
 they're on the dance-floor, waltzing, spinning.
 On the seashore, with storm impending,
 In swarms around Tatyana ranging,
 Still as he was? has he stopped prancing?
 Zaretsky watched, and stood there grinning.
 (alas, too salted); now they're bringing
 she's turned up in my garden, bringing
 his beasts outdoors at dawn, nor ringing
 would have divined the tender, shrinking
 Bacchante-like, her flighty prancing;
 ingenious London has been sending
 she loved the steppe-land and its singing,
 while in the hut a girl is singing;
 came distant horns, and gallant singing.
 What of it? Nothing. I'm just sending
 but, inside brackets, I'm contending
 and then a boat, with oars a-swinging,
 Olga's adorer comes a-wooing.
 Who's not disgusted by cajoling,
 and band already tired of blowing,
 roses romantically blowing;
 soon, infidelity proved cloying,
 else, having found his pleasure cloying,
 No, early on his heart was cooling
 such is the usual country cooking;
 the frozen corpse, drives off, and homing
 Or, in your lonely homestead, moping,
 a different mask? is he becoming
 Meanwhile the news of Eugene coming
 Childe-Harold-like, Eugene's devoting
 his sobs, where his live tears were flowing;
 and entered. Ballroom overflowing...
 it's easy, without too much fooling,
 The sky breathed autumn, time was flowing,
 and warmed the Chinese teapot; flowing
 Day faded; on the table, glowing,
 up your accounts, and raging, toping,
 and good old sun more seldom glowing;
 How often, when the sky was glowing,
 Once more he turned to books, unchoosing,
 We all meandered through our schooling
 Vladimir, wealthy and good-looking,
 I see another problem looming:
 of innocence: a lily blooming
 they kill the zest of rhymed composing,
 as all things did, to bore him; homing,
 the nightingale's begun to sing.
 The years incline to gloom and prosing,
 hope sting it, then we'll try deploying
 from off her charming shoulder's drooping,
 his weary head, and softly drooping
 the regimental band is coming,
 Straight up the chimney, pipes were smoking.
 The hearth was low beyond all stoking.
 beside his heavier half is snoring.
 and when its waters were not showing,
 four fateful stairs. Then, without slowing
 and friends and friendship, soul-destroying;
 At last, with dawn upon him, stooping
 and sideways her poor head is stooping.
 awaits him - hears nobody coming.
 cows low, in the still nights of spring
 her golden earrings off and whipping;
 Triquet sings, out of tune. Loud clapping
 Now powder's greyish stream is slipping
 ignores approval's friendly clapping,
 and where Thalia, gently napping,
 and now the crunchy snow is stripping
 Already Olga's hand was gripping
 great bard despite his modest trapping,
 into the pan. Securely gripping,
 the urn of perfumed tea, and tipping
 If only Lensky'd known the burning
 are we recalled to grief still burning
 On an old aunt, who's long been burning
 Your curiosity is burning
 a spirit strange, a spirit burning,
 as files, and scissors straight and curving,
 to his disputing and his cursing;
 its echoes, its belated urging,
 But finally she heaved a yearning
 secluded vales, where swans were crying,
 and so, before the world of learning,
 If Tanya'd had the chance of learning
 He'd brought back all the fruits of learning
 you drink the magic draught of yearning,
 devoted to the Muse, or learning,
 the thirst for work, the lust for learning,
 and where is love's tempestuous yearning,
 This work of the profoundest learning
 some splendid lady is referring
 He could have spoken without harming,
 the herdsman's horn proclaimed the morning
 the occupations of the morning.
 into the fields, surveys the morning,
 pinker than glow of Northern morning,
 untouched by envy's bitter smarting,
 whisper of breeze announces morning,
 would settle, on the morrow morning,
 Weltered in tears, and sorely smarting,
 the horse gets wind of them and, snorting,
 he who has cooled down love with parting,
 As if before some mournful parting
 the old dame wept her daughter's parting,
 my hours in fear and bitter crying.
 he should have settled for disarming
 the rosy sealing-wafer's drying
 with combs, and steel utensils serving
 its wayward tricks, its violent surging,
 a mansion stands just round a turning.
 she saw no friendly figure starting
 Or, unconsoled by the returning
 no years of absence past returning,
 Deep down, an epigram is stirring
 she walked, but just as she was turning
 shelter for trysts at every turning;
 one day came down that lonely turning,
 sets the wise traveller cavorting
 a great attraction to conversing.
 earth's rim grows light, and a forewarning
 daren't look behind her; fairly dashing --
 our troikas effortlessly dashing,
 And now, monotonously dashing
 the shepherd sings of Volga's fishing
 I longed, like every breaker hissing,
 to smother her dear feet with kissing.
 but ladies' hands are not for kissing;
 Then our Automedons are flashing,
 and eatables beyond all classing
 and for her cheeks to cease their blushing;
 with spinning noise and senseless flashing
 breaking the lilac bushes, smashing
 ``The man's a boor; his brain is missing,
 of any Br&eacute;guet: and in passing
 the unworthy husband through depressing
 admires the tumult and the pressing,
 to meet a black monk, or if crossing
 new guest is gradually progressing,
 a soul so innocent, so trusting.
 ``What in the world is more distressing
 And while with all despatch he's dressing
 but wildly still her heart is rushing,
 he warns his man for duty, stressing
 and though perhaps old fires were thrusting
 would leave her dithering and tossing.
 That point I wouldn't mind contesting,
 ``The elegy's just vain protesting,
 Below it, when sprang rains are swishing,
 all a pure maiden's love was breathing.
 Elbow on table, spirit seething,
 Not so? ``No, sirs, the ode's the thing,
 his spindly, shaggy nag. As fitting,
 at last alone, and quite forgetting
 On such indifference, such forgetting
 Time races, and she's been forgetting
 Her eyes along the margin flitting
 there's crashing, rumbling, pounding, trotting,
 Only the estate provides a setting
 Just facing Tanya's where they're sitting;
 Can she have found the enigma's setting?
 The bearded outrider is sitting
 then in the study's quiet setting,
 they're plunging, whirling, all but squatting.
 declares itself in ways unwitting --
 she lowers darkened eyes, unwitting,
 he had the talent of saluting
 that modish rings were still a-buying.
 appears offensive or amusing
 even the scandal's not amusing;
 The old dame had no thought of scouring
 Her husband enters, thus concluding
 Moscow... how many strains are fusing
 I must translate - there's no presuming --
 Manzoni and Chamfort,12 perusing
 no, not for long were belles the ruling
 he and Onegin start alluding
 How often would I fall to musing
 some nonsense thrown up while carousing,
 or if himself, with rage arousing,
 accounts were done, a winter outing
 while Petersburg's already rousing,
 while serious topics were disputing,
 Away inside that unassuming
 that fiery souls' headstrong enthusing
 everything's dim and unenthusing;
 Risen with earliest rays of dawning,
 outside, the scarlet rays of dawning
 comes clearer through the mists of dawning.
 no vision of her fields is dawning.
 towards his stall, the pedlar's hawking;
 And Eugene? half-awake, half-drowsing,
 to roar of banquets, din of brawling,
 lickspittles who adore their crawling,
 for which of them the tomb was yawning,
 when, utterly worn out by rhyming,
 so long as they're employed in song:
 shows freedom's advocate, that strong
 such rustic cunning can't be wrong!) --
 champion of rights, as in the wrong.
 our native speech had never sprung
 to talk as if with heart unwrung,
 were you in love when you were young?''
 but by and large their talk's a hash
 the driver sits and cuts a dash
 fieldwork directed from the path,
 the sober head, detesting each
 the meaning of an epigraph,
 Lensky composed in autograph
 a madrigal for epitaph.
 the young hostess, towards whom each
 towards the simple urn beneath;
 Who taught her all this mad, slapdash,
 his dull, sick look, his dumb reproach --
 I hear the wrath of your reproach.
 your heart some self-restraint; for each
 in my petition an approach,
 his humbly suppliant approach,
 over it a mysterious wreath:
 heartfelt, imploring, touching trash
 in sheepskin coat with scarlet sash.
 of the most harmless, hopeless trash.
 You'll love again, but you must teach
 so sketchily possessed by each,
 accounts, shaved forelocks,4 Sunday bath;
 the flickering tones of dress and speech,
 is it not true that Russian speech,
 human reaction, every speech
 and take due warning from my speech.
 now pay attention, I beseech,
 and raven curls of shoulder-length.
 paved roads will traverse Russia's length
 bringing her unity and strength;
 an eloquence of fevered strength,
 and he pursuing, till at length
 she flies no more, she's lost her strength.
 and offer to that ash a sigh;
 Another had the skill to ravish
 her thoughts away, knew how to lavish
 just there, is talking to the Spanish
 ``Wait, I'll present you - but you banish
 but first, the dreams that hope can cherish
 Dear Tanya, you're condemned to perish;
 Poor Tanya's bloom begins to languish,
 Meanwhile Onegin starts to languish:
 there's nothing can employ her anguish,
 Tatyana, hunted by love's anguish,
 he's got consumption. In his anguish
 suddenly lowering eyes that languish,
 impatient, hatred flaming high;
 my Africa,18 where waves break high,
 along the Neva in a sleigh,
 summons his people. On the sleigh
 breaks a new passage with his sleigh;
 custom's bestowed us from on high.
 4 Jean Lepage, Parisian gunsmith.
 5 ``A deliberate accumulation of conventional poetical formulae by means of which Pushkin mimics poor Lensky's own style... but the rich and original metaphor of the deserted house, closed inner shutters, whitened window-panes, departed female owner (the soul being feminine in Russian), with whi
 God grant them years and years of health!
 won't even cross their minds by stealth...
 so that all three went off to lunch,
 with lies and jokes that packed a punch:
 soon all that went without a wrench:
 11 Russian poet and translator from the French.
 the Russian N, like N in French;
 so fires of spring will bring to birth
 of neighbouring owners of the earth --
 a seedling fallen in the earth.
 There once I too strolled back and forth:
 the abstracted poet would bring forth
 fragments of poems from the North,
 but I'm allergic to the North...1
 Petrarch
 the tongue of love and of Petrarch.
 set the guests smiling at his arch,
 with foppery and too much starch,
 only to Eugene showed their worth;
 was asked around as quite a catch --
 you won't find that quite so much catch...
 and all the neighbours planned a match
 but when you've managed his despatch
 a dog with horns, a goatee'd witch,
 a rooster head, and on the twitch
 his neighbour entered at a rush
 were picking berries from the bough,
 the bloom has withered on the bough;
 choked up. There's no wreath on the bough;
 of waiting for the dawn to blush,
 fades from the view, and in the hush
 its due oblivion, in the hush
 The poet's dead... already though
 but here we must control our mouth.
 he turns away: ``I've had enough --
 you'll recognize him soon enough, --
 of perfect bliss in you. Enough!
 I love my Tatyana too much!
 no vulgar epigram too much,
 with deep emotion through and through,
 so pure, so spotless through and through,
 and scorned his fellows through and through,
 Sbogar,8 mysterious through and through,
 allows no comfort to come through --
 who in the dark came flashing through
 and sighs, and asks oneself all through:
 and arm in arm they all go through;
 in triumph you'll see winter through!
 he'd drink his coffee, flutter through
 and to Tanya, when he was through,
 crossed to the window, read it through.
 is finished, and I've looked it through
 I count each hour the whole day through;
 he eyes the door, looks slyly through.
 parodies winter in the south;
 both set him yawning just as much.
 there's no absurdity as such,
 my noon is here, and that's the truth.
 a portrait with a charming touch;
 your pride, some answer, or in truth
 fancies, my rhythmic search for truth,
 held in constraint by pity's touch:
 a modish taste, a dowdy touch --
 take leave of my lightheaded youth!
 once I too liked it very much;
 a friend of yours in his first youth
 nanny, companion of my youth;
 I
 I
 I
 I
 I
 VI
 VI
 XI
 LI
 LI
 XI
 XI
 XI
 VI
 VI
 II
 XI
 II
 II
 VI
 XI
 LI
 II
 VI
 XI
 La, sotto giorni nubilosi e brevi.
 20 River in the Crimea. The reference is to the harem girls in Pushkin's poem The Fountain of Bakhchisarai.
 II
 II
 II
 VI
 XI
 LI
 a gulf has gaped... Says Tanya: ``I
 and, with my Eugene, so have I.
 I'd not have known you, therefore I
 III
 III
 III
 III
 III
 III
 III
 LIII
 VIII
 VIII
 XIII
 XIII
 LIII
 VIII
 XIII
 VIII
 VIII
 XIII
 VIII
 VIII
 XIII
 XIII
 XIII
 LVIII
 XLVIII
 XLVIII
 XLVIII
 XLVIII
 XVIII
 XLIII
 XXIII
 XLIII
 XXIII
 XVIII
 XVIII
 XLIII
 XVIII
 XVIII
 XVIII
 XLIII
 XVIII
 XXIII
 XXIII
 XXIII
 XLIII
 XVIII
 XXIII
 XXIII
 XXIII
 XXVIII
 XXXIII
 XXXIII
 XLIII7
 XXXIII
 XXVIII
 XXXIII
 XXVIII
 XXXIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XXXIII
 XXVIII
 XXXIII
 XXXIII
 XXXVIII
 XXXVIII
 XXXVIII
 XXXVIII
 XXXVIII
 XXXVIII
 6 Stanza discarded by Pushkin, also stanza XXXVIII.
 LVI
 LII
 LII
 XLII
 XLVI
 XLVI
 XLII
 XLII
 XLII
 XLVI
 XLVI
 XLVI
 XLII
 (XXXIX, XL, XLI,) XLII
 It's time she went. But what can I
 the poet's only theme is ``I.''
 All in good time, on each point I
 VII
 VII
 VII
 VII
 VII
 VII
 VII
 XVII
 LVII
 XVII
 XVII
 XVII
 XVII
 XVII
 XVII
 (I, II, III, IV, V, VI,1) VII
 (XV, XVI,2) XVII
 XLVII
 XXVII
 XXVII
 XXVII
 XLVII
 XXVII
 XLVII
 XLVII
 XXVII
 XXVII
 XLVII
 XXVII
 XXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 &lt; XXXVII7
 XVI
 XXI
 XXI
 XLI
 XII
 XLI
 XII
 XXI
 XLI
 XVI
 XII
 XXI
 XXI
 XVI
 XII
 XLI
 XLI
 XII
 XLI
 XII
 XXI
 XVI
 XXI
 XII
 XII
 XVI
 XVI
 XXI
 XVI
 XXII
 XXXI
 XXVI
 XXXI
 XXVI
 XXVI
 XXXI
 XXVI
 XXXI
 XXII
 XXII
 XXXI
 XXII
 XXXI
 XXVI
 XXII
 XXVI
 XXVI
 XXII
 XXVI
 XXXI
 XXII
 XXXI
 XXII
 XXXII
 XXXII
 XXXII
 XXXII
 XXXVI
 XXXII
 XXXVI
 XXXII
 XXXVI
 XXXVI
 XXXII
 XXXII
 XXXVI
 XXXVI
 XXXVI
 XXXVI6
 In stead of happiness, say I,
 fruit liqueurs and an Almanack
 in taffeta of mourning black.
 blessed are daytime's care and cark,
 from her my lips will learn and mark
 their guests, for all they ate and drank,
 you made me drunk as one could ask!
 makes to her nurse low-voiced remark:
 the other, jugs of applejack,
 they managed to disperse the pack.
 blest is the advent of the dark!
 Tatyana, sleepless in the dark,
 with draughts from love's enticing flask,
 and swaggers in a red calpack;
 behind the mill. In solemn talk,
 a crayfish rides on spider-back;
 were served in order of their rank.
 by dint of cuff and kick and smack
 I'll just remark, my verses talk
 and hid the bookshelf's dusty stack
 I move in the grand monde? that rank,
 and riches, and the wish to thank
 a mild rebuke was his worst mark,
 replies: ``We might as well.'' They walk
 and then a stroll in Letny Park.
 to hope that even once a week
 verdicts of vanity the bleak,
 the flaming roses of a cheek,
 he was a menace, and a freak.
 to pass for an affected freak,
 does he still pose, and play the freak?
 their journey took them a full week.
 all shout and argue, laugh and squeak.
 to kiss Armida's lips, or seek
 what play will he present this week?
 of traveller's tedium at its peak:
 so much, I'm left no time to speak!
 but all concurred that, truth to speak,
 none listens when the others speak,
 I might have seen you, heard you speak
 men's thoughts, their plots, the words they speak,
 is agony, if I may speak,
 of course! you're bidden there next week.''
 in stars upon the river-brink.
 and bred upon the Neva's brink,
 you too have seen on Neva's brink.
 So now be off to Neva's brink,
 parterres, she runs to rivulet's brink,
 she peers discreetly through a chink
 avert his chest from pistol's click,
 first flakes of snow whirl round and sink
 the enjoyment of a friendly drink,
 the heart inside him seemed to shrink;
 but when past joking he fell sick,
 even without me it will sink;
 to gasp, and on a bench to sink.
 amateur of caprice and quirk.
 Eugene has caught up, quick as quick,
 but meanwhile let him live, and think
 where you were born as well, I think,
 Ladies of such a cast, I think,
 parting with Olga made him think
 and never played a shrewder trick.
 lest he should by some clever trick
 Lensky's thrown down. The murk is thick
 at hours, which, why I cannot think,
 and sees... whatever do you think?
 fruits of my labour and my ink...
 in morning time he'd read a book...
 and sleeping sounder than a rock.
 his elegies flow like a brook.
 by ancient limes, or by a brook;
 where flows a little glittering brook,
 says the old lady in a croak:
 across the fields, round hill and rock;
 then Lensky moved his pawn, and took,
 with lively and pellucid look,
 coldness of wit; each note he took,
 as much of banquets and the cork
 God grant that from this little book
 terse words or crosses in the book,
 would bless the form his fortune took.
 but pantaloons, waistcoat, and frock,
 the branches of the oak with flock;
 at any other sort of book.
 Vesper is met by crow of cock --
 Tatyana had a changeling look
 or else a query's wondering hook.
 and, in her hand, a small French book.
 you called there twice, and since then took
 at the Academic Diction-book.
 deep in distraction, his own rook.
 and finally be turned to rock
 though years ago I used to look
 had left the squire no time to look
 sad meditations in her look,
 more closely at the grammar-book;
 in her own home. She never took
 by Lensky in his Olga's book;
 heeding the press, will make us look
 in father's or old uncle's book,
 these words are not of Russian stock:
 grow cold, and hard, and stiff as stock,
 or else, my friend, how does it look?
 for heart's delight, or fun, you took,
 And just here, in the window-nook,
 and to that far and lonely nook
 in this fifth chapter of my work.
 Muse of the epic, bless my work!
 was an enchanting country nook:
 like Delvig3 when he's dining drunk.
 already she'd assume ill-luck.
 let no more such digressions lurk
 By dire presentiment awestruck,
 he sounds, in lyric frenzy sunk,
 any Madonna by Van Dyck:
 into an unbecoming brawl.
 Beds are made up; the guests are all
 swiftly decayed beyond recall
 dear ladies' feet fly past like hail,
 I have no leisure to recall;
 moonscape, the half-light overall,
 enquired the lady of the hall:
 send them good wishes through the mail
 brigade of liveries in the hall,
 Lord Byron's portrait on the wall,
 let me acquaint you on the nail
 packed from the maids' wing to the hall.
 they all have swarmed into the hall,
 we'd better hasten to the ball,
 the keys that opened up the hall.
 and in full brilliance shines the ball.
 to face him now I feel too frail...
 on dance-floor, at breakup of ball,
 I know it, in the thoughts of all
 the art he'd studied best of all,
 of husband's friendship - worst of all!
 I signal to each passing sail.
 like foliage in the rotting fall.
 of aunts and mothers, and the thrall
 Tatyana asked. The children all
 like Chatsky,5 he arrived to fall
 for angry heirs, as one, to fall
 direct from shipboard into ball.
 she quite forgot - began to call
 guests bow, feet scrape, and children squall.
 ``Maidens, pretty maidens all,
 or else lifts up a fallen shawl.
 Onegin has outrun us all.
 are old times, and the servants' hall.
 the Lord have mercy on us all!
 sentiment, notebook, verses, all
 the threshold's thronged, wet-nurses call,
 ``No, no, I'm sure the party's small.
 ``it seems that he forgot us all.''
 or seminarist in yellow shawl!
 Relations. No-one else at all.
 and on their captivating trail
 we visit them, or without fail
 whatever you may need, just call...
 ``it's time!'' and freedom hears my hail.
 the child prepares for protocol --
 she'd never tell them news or scandal
 Public opinion - here's our idol,
 with scorn to make my world a hell.
 used in times past to ring a peal
 in which our hero used to dwell.
 Farewell, familiar woods! Farewell,
 wished him to come and say farewell.
 Still for ever, fare thee well.
 the cunning prisoner can quite well
 no, quite naively I'll retell
 my carefree song would thus reveal
 and still within, behind the veil
 he dozed away; but when the real
 while floors would split from crash of heel,
 goodbye to you, my true ideal,
 and walk, and breathe, before I tell
 over the modish word ideal,
 the mountain maiden,19 my ideal,
 although it's nearly heard the knell,
 this angel, this proud devil, tell,
 whether from heaven or from hell,
 in his small shack, will listen well
 from the agent, with this tale to tell:
 is needed, nothing's left to tell.
 he trembles, knows not what to tell;
 and coachmen swear, and women squeal.
 lift up the gauzes of her veil,
 my friends, I need to pause a spell,
 and breeding ducks and geese as well,
 at any hour escape his cell.''
 to tales that young moustachios tell.
 shall make my story grim as hell;
 and teaching children how to spell.
 Since then Martin Zad&eacute;ka's spell
 spectacled age divines as well,
 and yet so light. All that is real
 beauty with all its heavenly spell,
 she went inside the empty shell
 he's happy, yes, he's almost well...
 the cooks prepare the midday meal;
 wild as a forest deer, and fearful,
 But ever stranger and more fearful:
 a red-foot goose, weight something fearful,
 Shy as a savage, silent, tearful,
 Throughout their life, so calm, so peaceful,
 Happy is he who's known its fretful
 Evgeny stood, with soul regretful,
 with sighs unconsciously regretful.
 and skids and tumbles down; the cheerful
 on goose's neck, a skull looks cheerful
 he stood there, pensive and forgetful,
 for them, in Butterweek5 the greaseful,
 ``It is a friend I sing, a youthful
 The years would pass; no longer youthful,
 I drop my hero... I'll be truthful:
 Perhaps however, to be truthful,
 7 Heroine of Ozerov's tragedy Fingal.
 Onegin, drenched with sudden chill,
 such stubborn brain, and vivid will,
 spirit that anguish had made ill.
 XL
 from early morning on he will
 has gone to Olga, swept the girl
 early tomorrow at the mill
 XL
 XL
 he reached the stream below the hill;
 without an elegiac frill,
 two sisters who'd received the initial,9
 a novel, vague and superficial,
 she finds in river and in hill.
 But let's return to our essential,
 it had its epigram-potential7...
 Lensky, restored to his manorial
 over his neighbour's plain memorial,
 A new acquaintance claims our quill.
 no word came flowing from his quill;
 Often she halts against her will,
 engaged then - but against her will;
 he drinks - all shout and take a swill;
 of work made him feel sick, and still
 darts to the boy, and looks, and still
 Lensky's estate, there lives and still
 he scowls - and the whole gang are still;
 But now Vladimir's doubts are still:
 as sacred, lies before me still.
 that spring with me has had its fill
 is he who's never felt its will,
 and heart so tender, it can still
 a country house - and one who still
 empire, and fled it; happier still
 ``She was the one who looked as still
 at two-ball billiards prove his skill;
 Princess Alina. She was still
 drank in your words when all was still --
 The darkness thins away; but still
 past all the assembly in a whirl,
 sits there beside the window-sill!
 She sits down by the window-sill.
 and sat down by the window-sill.''
 can read enough to get my fill.
 at sunken wax inside a bowl:
 L
 6 Delphine, by Madame de Sta&euml;l, 1805.
 is known today; only a soul
 then he presents her with the scroll.
 graduates of the Levshin1 school,
 of raging passion's surge and roll
 of other's thought - a splendid goal;
 be doomed to feel it: there's one goal
 he's first to toast her in the bowl,
 oppressed by emptiness of soul,
 before such playfulness of soul!...
 Tatyana turned with thirsting soul:
 still captivated his young soul.
 not bad at all; and then each soul
 and watched a different world unroll.
 left quite alone with his own soul,
 the world's &eacute;clat, its thunder-roll,
 with Olga, all have pierced her soul;
 he's called you out - say, in your soul
 his thoughts were on a distant goal:
 and swarming in his inmost soul.
 ever so roughly rocked my soul!
 in vain on my unworthy soul?
 or cunningly create a quarrel,
 and though he liked a fiery quarrel --
 But he could draw a joking moral,
 so heartless and so detrimental,
 and volume three of Marmontel.
 L
 in play with her obedient doll
 had won her loyalty! What soul
 his Strasbourg pie, or point a moral,
 what feelings would assume control
 and to the vision of those mortal
 she can't; Evgeny's pushed the portal,
 By now the sledge is at the portal --
 to bring across Lepage's4 mortal
 on foot, by seven o'clock, until
 to the complacent and the null;
 that wit embarrasses the dull;
 Still blazing with resentment's fuel,
 sed alia tempora! The devil
 wishes his madness to the devil,
 he'd got annoyed, the tricky devil.
 he whirls her through the wood... a hovel
 But how she jumped, when in this hovel
 L
 had killed his best friend in a duel;
 to A&yuml;'s vintage in the sequel
 XL
 I find myself no longer equal;
 (XXXIX,2) XL
 was finding leisure's vacuum cruel;
 where can we find your equal?
 L
 Lensky resolved before the duel
 installed in me a different devil,
 XL
 and sink to prose's humble level:
 who else? - the hero of our novel!
 Though long since Eugene's disapproval
 (like passion's dream, that other revel)
 my soul in secret gave survival;
 the subtle spouse was just as loyal --
 and the majestic, antlered royal,
 XL
 and still exempted from removal
 shows up through trees, all of a grovel
 No hope! no hope! He leaves the revel,
 Now, faced with this enormous revel,
 then from the Muse there came revival:
 that lady whose engaging charm
 the easier they become to charm,
 those walks amid the gloom and calm
 of evening, and those tears, the balm
 so effortlessly can disarm.
 enticing nets to do them harm.
 to garden walks, as arm in arm
 they while away the morning's calm.
 ``There, just in front of all that swarm,
 impatiently on the mill-dam,
 meanwhile a hallboy handed cream;
 Oh God, what did he think!'' A dream
 freedom's enthusiastic dream,
 in midst of a poetic dream,
 arch-commentator of the dream.
 I liked his quality, the dream
 another, a more chilling dream,
 and as in some appalling dream
 dean of Chaldea's learned team,
 adore the love that comes in dream.
 O Brenta, I'll see you in dream;
 of a delicious, guiltless dream...
 oppressed her like a heavy dream.
 or for that Demon4 of my dream.
 to spoil loose paper by the ream;
 in her torn heart - a fickle gleam;
 some other, older spring will gleam,
 the kiss where youth and freshness gleam;
 has taken on a silvery gleam;
 from German realms of mist and steam,
 covered the golden coal - the steam
 its barely noticeable stream.
 all plunged his soul deep in the stream
 Down there, by slow degrees, the stream
 into the cups its darkling stream --
 the shady wood, the talking stream;
 the magic voices of your stream,
 retired, as he, from fashion's stream,
 hereditary foes they seem,
 Zizi, my crystal and my gem,
 condemned the millstones as a sham.
 He roamed the world, his lyre behind him;
 a Lancer - how she deified him!
 Schiller and Goethe had refined him,
 And our young poet - Olga fired him
 and thoughts of her were what inspired him
 life's real meaning would have found him;
 at length, midst children swarming round him,
 But she refuses to perceive him,
 At home she'll equably receive him,
 he really forced one to admire him --
 then later slyly he'd revile them
 already there she stands beside him;
 Or he knew how to reconcile them
 ``My uncle - high ideals inspire him;
 the tighter we can stretch above them
 With womankind, the less we love them,
 dared clean his nails in front of him,
 some ladies preach from Say and Bentham,
 Tatyana! it's addressed... to whom?
 he's a freemason too; for him,
 He wakes - and who is this who writes him?
 Prince N. respectfully invites him
 It's true, I'll not misrepresent them,
 stretched on a sofa, calls to greet them.
 a grizzled Calmuck stands to meet them,
 cherries then we'll throw at him,
 and redcurrants throw at him.
 could not conceive how solemn Grimm13
 dressed up a desperate egoism
 to look like sad romanticism.
 Semy&oacute;n Petr&oacute;vich, mean and glum,
 far-distant heaven's vaulted room;
 grows, surges, boils, for lack of room
 a humble cross, in woodland gloom,
 the girl remains there in the gloom
 and festal evenings in the gloom.
 clears in a flash the freezing room;
 a nightingale, in forest gloom,
 you see the two in uniform...
 the fear and rage with which I foam!
 across the plain's enormous room,
 despite herself, is Lensky's doom;
 Walking? The country that you roam
 at soldier-husbands, and the drum.
 red wine in tumblers to the brim --
 untirable, at sound of drum:
 how they remind me of your stem,
 of virgin fancy, and again
 was one who raged and raged again,
 would not have recognized again
 On this we'll part; goodbye again!
 fate could be something else again..,
 the youthful lover once again
 after two minutes, off again,
 we sometimes like to hear again
 from waxen cell the bees again
 thought, day and night, and thought again
 leads Olga and Tatyana on
 advantages of heart and brain,
 to hit the target: thigh or brain.
 her little friends, Tatyana'd yawn,
 Oh, this could all be false and vain,
 runs after what is sweet, and vain.
 and trembles like a hunted fawn.
 were from his vision quite withdrawn.
 in silence all day she'd remain
 no artifices of the vain...
 God grant you took at least a grain.
 on modish malice, coarse of grain
 a furious, boiling, heaving main
 for Olga, on the spreading lawn,
 something like spleen, that scourge of Britain,
 to your loved ones? They do maintain
 it hurts, he laughs, and all in vain
 radiance of Dian, sits in pain
 the charm of what was grave and plain.
 No, all in her was calm and plain.
 and looks out on the darkened plain.
 already silvering all the plain...
 levy their tribute on the plain;
 she walked across a snowy plain
 days that are lost behind the curtain,
 round the dim river sleep; the curtain
 No sleep, beneath that silken curtain,
 but Eugene hasn't moved; for certain
 of hills has hid the moon; for certain
 in that new couch, no sleep for certain;
 and parts the fringes of his curtain;
 He who has lived and thought is certain
 that this of all things for a swain
 her full account of voiceless pain?
 He deemed, in general, letters vain,
 and rightly so, but now his pain
 for, mistress-like, it's brilliant, vain,
 to raise the safety catch and strain
 onset of the incipient yawn,
 To whom do you, from all the train
 a dwarf with tail, and a half-strain,
 and paler than the moon at dawn,
 reduced to sense, not without pain --
 of jealous girls, devote its strain?
 plunged in reflection's deepest train,
 here, seize it quick for this quatrain!)
 my disillusioned glass, and yearn,
 epoch's portrayed, survived the ban,
 and feel once more emotion's ban.
 so, if we want to change, we can!
 sometimes from a fair, black-eyed maiden
 she sees it all. The simple maiden,
 the flower-like pallor of the maiden,
 by country freedom, rightful pardon
 walked homeward round the kitchen garden;
 all for our tender dreamy maiden
 In duels a pedantic don,
 once more renounces world and din.
 with comedies of swarm and din;
 Here's tea: the girls have just, as bidden,
 when, from behind the doorway, hidden
 and Werther, martyred and doom-laden,
 without surprise or rage... his laden,
 her look, so sweetly sorrow-laden,
 Books, riding, walks, sleep heavy-laden,
 on a fast stallion from the Don,
 he heard in stillness and in din
 in midst of trouble, storm or din.
 locked himself up inside his den
 but salt; near the princess a vein
 there caustic Shakhovsk&oacute;y8 came in
 use cunning silence as a screen,
 of happy love. For I have been
 a marksman crouching in the green.
 since, through the mist that dreams arise on,
 asked Lensky: ``Should we start, I mean?''
 became their scrutiny's concern.
 and on the flames let fall unseen
 3 A statuette of Napoleon.
 of tempests, in what raging ocean
 at once they give a man the spleen.
 of his own room, how cruel spleen
 harboured by maidens of thirteen!
 so virtuous that, no sooner seen,
 return an answer, blunt or keen,
 and truffles, which have ever been
 of prejudice that's never been
 the jug of bilberry wine is seen.1
 however strongly she has been
 on a small table's oilcloth sheen
 the hare who from afar has seen
 and once forbidden fruit is seen,
 a note from Lensky; in between
 and the derivative Knyazhn&iacute;n:8
 for friends of languor, or of fun,
 last night he'd erred in making fun,
 He looks, and answers: ``Agafon.''4
 a ball in Petersburg; but fun
 and soon his travels had begun,
 the clamorous honking geese began
 You've guessed before it all began:
 the festal name day has begun.
 as battles go, I've not begun;
 Evgeny quietly began
 he saw no point in staying on,
 swaying the artless, waiting on
 Tatyana's Letter to Onegin
 one sees a duck and aims his gun,
 I might have said a word, and then
 God's thunder burn you up! And when
 yet he'd back you through thick and thin:
 with deeds; that dunces now and then
 In passion's sluicing rain they freshen,
 in lives that were just dawning then.
 a deathless murmur from within,
 were chanted, I remember when --
 immortals picked by fate for when,
 to talk of this and that, but then
 whose serfs are miserably thin;
 then he'd implore a declaration,
 it mastered him in slow gradation;
 to give you honest explanation.
 Tatyana's name day celebration.
 you acted well, that dread occasion,
 no mannerism, no affectation,
 He reads to Olga on occasion,
 would have been spared this laceration.
 How dull are acting and evasion,
 in indescribable elation,
 Bards of our tearful generation,
 Tatyana listened with vexation
 where are distress, commiseration?
 the prince bring up his own relation
 hell's terrifying imprecation:
 at verse, and hiss an imprecation,
 Compassion, yes, and indignation,
 To batten down their indignation
 secure a secret assignation,
 somehow have got the designation
 Left-handed from the habitation
 In time, who knows, the agitation
 and all our fresh imagination,
 I'll gladden your imagination,
 before his eyes, imagination
 come, trouble my imagination,
 the strangeness of her habitation,
 Lost in our backwoods habitation
 She'll not see him, her obligation
 thank God, he had no inclination
 yet a capricious inclination,
 too long, against my inclination,
 by writers of her admiration,
 on words of foreign derivation,
 Tatyana sees with trepidation
 trusted her without hesitation,
 etcetera. But her trepidation
 Idle again by dedication,
 Evgeny, hating litigation,
 pride's icy calm, the combination
 ``I?'' ``Saturday. The invitation
 Sign of the urge for domination:
 finding in that no deprivation --
 And home was now their destination;
 the coach has reached its destination;
 I'm altering my destination
 Napoleon's our sole inspiration;
 Fired by the god of inspiration,
 where dwelt this child of inspiration,
 ``Whose glance, provoking inspiration,
 hear, once more filled with inspiration,
 field-work, and walks with inspiration,
 But come, thou youthful inspiration,
 A moment earlier, inspiration
 bitter-sweet glory's inspiration,
 when our sublimest aspiration,
 I know (and seek your exculpation)
 I pray God grant his soul salvation,
 another bard1 in exaltation
 you see, with tears and incantation
 and in the misted condensation
 where fate had fixed our confrontation,
 with our Mamas, and a sensation
 it had no sparkle of sensation,
 Then gradually upon sensation,
 So to his wife for presentation
 with fond caress? whose adoration
 Though belles had lost his adoration,
 Of course. Yet fashion's wild rotation,
 with careful schemes of decoration
 of his Och&aacute;kov7 decoration!
 of philosophic isolation,
 When progress and amelioration
 our terror is their consolation.
 rebuffed, found instant consolation;
 O Adrian waves, my invocation;
 Her loving spouse with approbation
 Seeing herself as a creation --
 She struck one as the incarnation --
 the millions of two-legged creation
 In Tanya, what a transformation!
 of Eugene, cold as all creation,
 he strove to achieve the appropriation
 have you read lines of your creation
 what kind of thought, what observation,
 I thank him without reservation,
 and logic; yet the conversation
 To talk, to general conversation
 this was our heroes' conversation
 (I like a friendly conversation,
 the fleeting works of my creation,
 thrives to this moment, in a station
 her secret work of magic suasion!
 how soon the bounds of rank and station
 mother implored me; my sad station
 of moralistical persuasion,
 earnestly striving for persuasion
 before the window taking station,
 that corps of social legislation --
 your icy look, your stern dissuasion,
 With mounts from home, or postal station,
 &lt; My gaze pursues them... but on station
 is where old master took up station,
 had filled this heart, and detestation
 must be to hold in detestation
 And from the nearby Army station
 She enjoys the stately orchestration
 The invalid's glad salutation,
 Compliment and congratulation;
 But here, with our congratulation
 When Eugene's turn for salutation
 How often on the steep Caucasian
 but the salon's preoccupation
 Even at home his occupation
 and all our modish education;
 with a blunt cue for the duration,
 a hideous deal of tribulation.
 so, full of heart-felt tribulation,
 in time (to quote the calculation
 alone, and sunk in calculation,
 This wearisome perambulation
 my span, that fortune's jurisdiction
 drink in the midnight benediction,
 there's far too much of contradiction,
 in dreams and cards and their prediction,
 The kinsfolk in concerted action
 of his intent; and a reaction
 of childish pranks: a chilled reaction
 for nature's unadorned reaction
 The nervous-tragical reaction,
 the quintessential reaction
 by what's called machinal reaction,
 the brilliant crackpot: this reaction
 In time past, objects of affection
 I grasp a stirrup with affection,
 I gave no rein to sweet affection:
 I feel a brotherly affection,
 showed one a pattern of perfection
 the universe is all perfection;
 arrested by the sheer perfection
 from gaol to greenwood, by such fiction
 he read, and read - no satisfaction:
 with such a blissful, brief infection --
 Whatever in this rough confection
 meticulously; in my fiction
 on Eugene's lips. In his dejection,
 and always the self-same objection;
 I've drawn a plan and a projection,
 for him all sham has found rejection,
 He lacked the slightest predilection
 what held me was my predilection,
 the man of reverie and reflection,
 what holds her in profound reflection,
 is lost in obstinate reflection;
 almanacs, journals of reflection,
 and charming reverie's vain deflection
 a dream's mute monument, reflection
 Lending his tone a grave inflection,
 He found them in some old collection,
 To reading from this odd collection
 absorbed me in the recollection
 Another page of recollection:
 then on the leaves of recollection,
 but groomed an anecdote-collection
 you sought - tumultuous recollection,
 he's gnawed by serpent Recollection,
 A pause of silence and inaction,
 of Russian verse, its force in action, --
 Poets, I'll say in this connection,
 the books then underwent inspection...
 Walking her horse in introspection
 but looks and talk took the direction,
 Dogs, howling, rushed in her direction...
 I trust my fate to your direction,
 all brought to life at your direction.
 Reader, whatever fate's direction,
 She wanders on without direction.
 but where such hymns in my direction
 she can't make out a single fraction
 with shelves of books deployed for action,
 how dull to work for the correction
 He gave his arm. In sad abstraction,
 present her languor and distraction
 it stood, defiant of destruction
 Lensky all evening, in distraction,
 had long proved tedious to distraction:
 what dream accounts for her distraction?
 Rousseau (forgive a short distraction)
 The ch&acirc;teau was of a construction
 It's true, the magnet-like attraction
 Tatyana never knew the attraction
 But you perhaps find no attraction
 All right, you want the resurrection
 to undertake their resurrection,
 ``I've dreams and years past resurrection;
 Meanwhile my novel's opening section
 Tanya's distress had risked detection
 giving the lady their protection,
 I weep, and pray for your protection..,
 I must wake up with the conviction
 Tatyana shared with full conviction
 I would have had the indiscretion
 I know it's now in your discretion
 How soft his glance, or at discretion
 stays fixed and focused on a vision
 His unexpected apparition,
 Protect me from such apparition
 what is he? Just an apparition,
 was it not you, dear apparition,
 I'm blind to every apparition;
 a joker in the old tradition,
 The Larins kept the old tradition:
 he changed the corv&eacute;e of tradition
 the guardian angel of tradition,
 the unmetric verses of tradition
 only by rule, and strict tradition
 as bonneted Academician
 ``Oh nurse, a favour, a petition...''
 a modish second-hand edition,
 Then Tanya hears of the decision.
 stands in dismay and indecision.
 to puzzle out with some precision
 thirty-two steps with great precision,
 which has recalled, without precision,
 To face society's derision
 untouched by trace of inhibition,
 into his look, the exhibition
 I've learnt the voice of new ambition,
 the modesty of her condition,
 Tatyana, hiding her condition,
 Perhaps to improve the world's condition,
 those words where love, without condition,
 she yields to it without condition
 At this midnight of my condition,
 and yet a distant admonition
 of the two girls; their premonition
 The flirt has reason's cool volition;
 a truly noble disposition;
 methodical by disposition,
 the first will never find fruition,
 Tatyana's haunted by her vision,
 or some vile agent of perdition
 Fate saved Evgeny from perdition:
 With spelling scrambled to perdition,
 yet people's malice and suspicion
 ``Now don't suppose... let no suspicion...
 at first Madame gave him tuition,
 Fonvizin8 sparkled, freedom's champion,
 Enchanted land! There like a lampion
 which, listening with some condescension,
 Perhaps some secret apprehension
 Vladimir to this casual mention
 and so he lacks the strength to mention
 and then it's tea that comes to mention,
 it's late, time's passing... not to mention,
 they all have richly earned a pension;''
 over the note holds in suspension
 In the white heat of some dissension
 She's paid the sunrise no attention,
 What cause has won me your attention?
 her husband's or the world's attention...
 Now brooding thoughts hold his attention
 he's bowed politely; his attention
 devoured a book with rapt attention,
 Now, she devours, with what attention,
 and whisper ``Dunya, pay attention!''
 but I've not got the least intention
 in our affair, the intervention
 Deaf to her sister's intervention,
 he'll charm you with his fine invention,
 and all their ravishing invention
 Zaretsky draws up a convention
 Could it not be that by convention
 of wild repentance and devotion
 She went - and Eugene, all emotion,
 our hapless Tanya! An emotion
 Tatyana in a deep emotion
 your tears would flow - but your emotion,
 What sort of roses, in your notion,
 she drinks it like a priceless potion;
 yet, as each rule has its exception,
 By dreams now sad in their conception,
 More tolerant in his conception
 Eugene forsakes the packed reception,
 in gossip's rambling and discursion
 He got so used to this immersion,
 are here untouched by fashion's reign,
 As with old friends, she craves diversion
 or joined us poets. His conversion
 Evgeny, whom the repercussion
 nothing was barred beyond discussion --
 a lady - what a grim discussion! --
 As soon as he appears, discussion
 Zaretsky rose without discussion;
 three carts - traditional procession --
 when, in pale sky, the stars' procession
 of hope and gloom, romantic-fashion,
 he's seen it all; with looks and fashion
 I'm yours, in a predestined fashion,
 they fluff her curls out in the fashion,
 in which the rhymester-man-of-fashion
 ended his wild career of fashion
 But, now I've praised the queens of fashion,
 no softball for the winds of fashion,
 amid the deadening joys of fashion,
 All this has now gone out of fashion,
 in music's own bewitching fashion
 I'll conjure up that swooning fashion
 wronged always in disgraceful fashion --
 had gone in no uncertain fashion
 she wrote in French... what a confession!
 hope that he's had no time to fashion
 ``I write to you - no more confession
 in casual letters of confession --
 Well, I must make a frank confession,
 As, lovingly, in his confession,
 that virgin dream and its confession
 will anger you in its confession.
 I make magnanimous confession,
 to sob out prayer, complaint, confession,
 if I had power to choose your fashion --
 he failed to join that sharp profession
 our kin are folk whom by profession
 Evgeny thought in just this fashion.
 sharing her in promiscuous fashion,
 Already, in exultant fashion,
 Tatyana pined in secret fashion:
 then, on the last page, the suggestion:
 though he's unknown, there's no suggestion
 times were, when master's least suggestion...''
 pours out its guiltless frank admission,
 before she goes, she seeks permission
 one listened to a chief of mission
 his lyre, now stilled, in its high mission
 A thinker in a desert mission,
 let not the poet's soul of passion
 The arbitrary rules of passion
 excited not a hint of passion:
 than this humiliating passion
 he sends a letter, penned with passion.
 He gave this figure - loved with passion,
 facing a belle I loved with passion,
 But you, grand tomes I loathe with passion,
 But when the hour of youthful passion
 gives way to nature's normal passion:
 at eighteen years, to some compassion.
 My friends, the bard stirs your compassion:
 But, even by accident, her passion
 in terms of poetry or passion --
 the foreign words a maiden's passion
 pouted, and swore in furious passion
 the sufferings of tempestuous passion;
 this was the science of that passion
 he's viewed the boxes without passion,
 to battle further with my passion;
 a grain of gladness; tears' repression
 Bard13 of The Feasts, and heart's depression,
 the fateful diet; by depression
 Pleasant, in spite of its compression,
 Yet Tanya's note made its impression
 ``But, if you've kept some faint impression
 So let me with a kind expression
 Vladimir's challenge found expression
 What scorn I see in the expression
 how I interpret this expression:
 Herder, and even at times a Russian --
 ripen, and find a new expression --
 between their girls and this half-Russian.
 There many pages keep the impression
 They should be forced to read in Russian,
 At feasts, though, full of pert aggression,
 in Russian never found expression,
 before such candour of expression,
 the poet's heart found full expression,
 and tried to write, but a hard session
 She loved the balcony, the session
 On these, with something like obsession,
 with every sort of home possession:
 Shade-like, in purposeless obsession
 Rage died, and jealousy's obsession,
 how fearful, too, is my obsession
 Her feelings in their weary session
 On the first sheet you'll find a question:
 that he's not honest past all question.''
 ``Oh nyanya, nyanya, I don't question...
 an idle monk in glum seclusion,
 The manor house, in deep seclusion,
 I'll float in gondola's seclusion;
 freedom and peace, in substitution
 What folly! and what retribution!
 dear Tanya, lover of illusion;
 What else? Quite drunk with love's illusion,
 He followed them without illusion,
 How often, with her sweet communion,
 her discomposure, her confusion,
 and plunged in tender shame's confusion,
 lost them without regret's contusion,
 your molten gold, your charmed infusion;
 he almost begs for absolution,
 he looks, in sweet irresolution,
 When I defected from their union
 expose his soul to an intrusion
 screened by a hill from storm's intrusion,
 through it they're known to me, and kin.
 on kennels, and on kith and kin,
 he loves you... like your kith and kin!
 ``Oh nurse, I'm sad, I'm sad, I'm shaken,
 Italian nights, when I'll drink in
 surer than friendship or than kin,
 ``You wrote to me, and nothing spoken
 Moments of silence, quite unbroken;
 you find the country godforsaken;
 A sledded coach, for years forsaken,
 but now the mansion is forsaken;
 5 Hussar and friend of Pushkin.
 13 Evgeny Baratynsky (1800-1844). Poet and friend of Pushkin.
 3 Anton Delvig, poet and close friend of Pushkin.
 4 Poet and acquaintance of Pushkin.
 7 Stanzas XXXVII, XXXVIII and XLIII were discarded by Pushkin.
 2 Stanzas XV, XVI and XXXVIII were discarded by Pushkin.
 1 Stanzas I to VI were discarded by Pushkin.
 6 These lines and the first twelve lines of stanza XLVII were discarded by Pushkin.
 2 Stanzas VIII and IX and XXXIX were discarded by Pushkin.
 2 Lines discarded by Pushkin.
 2 Stanzas IX, XIII, XIV, XXXIX, XL and XLI were omitted by Pushkin.
 11 Ballerina, once courted by Pushkin.
 1 Stanza left incomplete by Pushkin.
 of chalk the window-panes have taken.
 Departure date's long overtaken;
 ``So to strange kinsfolk I was taken...
 our joy in you is warmly taken.
 the boring wives, the ill-bred men,
 my strange, incorrigible man.
 and even honourable man:
 of blind Fortuna and of men
 e sempre bene, gentlemen.
 for her improvement, a roman,
 claiming Tatyana'd found her man;
 So a disabled soldier-man,
 take wing on spite; that serious men
 works where contemporary man
 of human friendship, holy men,
 fat P&uacute;styakov has driven in;
 that rogue, backbiter, pantaloon,
 young traitresses by the platoon,
 and once again received a crown.
 and at the altar, with a crown,
 her to the altar and the crown.
 to vice, while virtue got its crown.
 the laurel in the old man's crown!
 due punishment was handed down
 till he at last was summoned down
 his beefsteak with champagne, or drown
 the branches all are weighted down
 and pay my debt in the same coin
 the thought of volatile renown.
 whose kindly hand will ruffle down
 yet floods of talk around the town...
 But now the radiance of the moon
 the latest fashions of the town;
 but I won't praise you - let me join
 thoughts of a girl, or as the moon
 She was alone, lit by the moon.
 bribe-taker, glutton and buffoon.
 would talk, keep silent, laugh, then frown --
 in the full beauty of its frown;
 of Muses' offspring; sitting down
 can't really be: for we've outgrown
 not every day could he wash down
 and lovelorn maiden whom he'd known,
 if not slow-witted, might have known.
 moves the young watcher (as was known
 to bee and butterfly unknown.
 good night; I swear I'll lie down soon.''
 and read the books there on her own.
 fits us as if it were our own?
 has driven off, to find his own.
 the darling sex is light as down.
 her head in modesty cast down,
 a rogue, a slanderer, a poltroon,
 sleep much, read little, and put down
 than households where the wife must moan
 to be the bride I'd call my own.
 is dimmed. Down there the valley soon
 Imagine it: quite on my own
 to lift his pistol up. A span
 the spring of honour, and the pin
 on which the world is doomed to spin.
 and with a yawn took up his pen,
 by Baratynsky's3 wondrous pen,
 Byron
 by Scott, by Seneca, or Byron,
 He was a good and simple barin;6
 her heart had long been overrun:
 7 Melmoth the Wanderer, by C. R. Mathurin, 1820.
 ``A humble sinner, Dimitry Larin,
 drives home - and plunging deeper in,
 and jokes and spiteful gossip ran
 Martin Zad&eacute;ka was the siren,
 don't judge the race before it's run --
 ``What, Grandison? oh, Grandison!
 Escaped from social rhyme and reason,
 The days flew past; by now the season
 to burn - and then by force of reason
 Each day, despite the appeals of reason,
 to demonstrate some signs of reason:
 How fearful, in and out of season
 he drives up in and out of season
 no meaning in or out of season,
 At first I thought it out of season
 But what about Eugene? With reason
 imagination, with such reason,
 Like modish rhymes that lack all reason,
 burst to a fiery blaze in season?
 craving your tolerance in season --
 By contrast, in the frozen season,
 so, seeing there no rhyme or reason,
 In backwoods, how d'you pass this season?
 He's neither died, nor lost his reason,
 if I'd possessed the slightest reason
 of your slim prints! though this be treason
 I was Onegin's friend that season.
 from daybreak valleys lift the sun;
 is a compulsive bore by reason
 tread the calm, settled path they've chosen...
 No look, no word for him: she's chosen
 Here comes the yard-boy, who has chosen
 Buy&aacute;nov, my vivacious cousin,
 so often from her Moscow cousin
 7 Fortress captured from the Turks in 1788.
 the roundest face that you've set eyes on,
 invariably, as time went on,
 alone, with no adornment on;
 on liquor, and on hay brought in,
 in one so slothful, so hard-bitten?
 because some glance of his has bitten
 In love with fame, by freedom smitten,
 The illness with which he'd been smitten
 What if your pistol-shot has smitten
 what odes Vladimir might have written --
 a swift, polite reply is written.
 4 Hero of Mathilde, by Sophie Cottin, 1805.
 And foes he sees, long-since forgotten,
 comrades despised, and comrades rotten;
 and it deceived us in return;
 something to fritter and to burn,
 of fate, and life, each in its turn
 that alien scene must I now turn
 the untiring city, where you've given
 flown like an arrow, then he's given
 lay on the fields; in caravan
 Forsake, indulgent reader - driven
 Up to the porch our hero's driven:
 Chapter Seven
 Notes to Chapter Seven
 The princess, sitting peaked and wan,
 and entice a fellow in
 When we draw a fellow in,
 to Eugene; nineteen to the dozen,
 about them - nineteen to the dozen --
 she appears before him, grim and frozen.
 a dumb moon, on a dumb horizon.''
 a free romance's far horizon,
 the rogue has got a finger frozen:
 The sky is clear, the earth is frozen;
 Onegin without more ado
 a soul that perished long ago,
 as instituted long ago.''
 and roused the village long ago:
 of language which, so long ago,
 in Lyc&eacute;e gardens long ago,
 since I stopped sinning years ago.
 where did that glum eccentric go,
 his conscience's record, and so
 they were her only food... and so
 after that, supper's served, and so
 made all fates look the same... and so
 with your good offices, and so
 ``You know him, do you?'' ``Yes and no.''
 she'd cheer my wordless way, and do
 ``This time I think you've been reduced to
 that self-same evening where he'd go.
 ``You yawn, Onegin?'' ``As I'm used to.''
 as fast as post-horses could go,
 but spared no glance for Cicero;
 Who on earth is he? not... our hero?
 she did what nurse advised she do
 like irksome phantoms, null as zero.
 thought them a pointless peccadillo;
 ``Just half a glass more... that will do...
 Enough, I tell you, that will do --
 sacred to children of Apollo!
 she flies as fast as she can go;
 the shepherd, as he used to do,
 ``I think I'm happy.'' Time to go,
 blooms when there's nothing else to do.
 is that my feet lack strength to go
 Enough, my friends; it's all so-so.
 bed-time, and time for guests to go.
 or pine, persuade of yes or no,
 than what our sorrowing rhymesters do?
 see with their jugs the milk-girls go
 and how's Tatyana? Olga too,
 and on the crumpled sofa too
 the hero's name's decided too.
 and ran far off... the Muse came too.
 of grammar, Russian language too.
 Onegin sits at table too,
 4 This Russianized version of the Greek Agatho is ``elephantine and rustic to the Russian ear''. Nabokov. See note 3 to Chapter Two.
 In such an album, friends, I too
 her handkerchief has fallen too;
 Tatyana's heart is rent in two.
 still eats and drinks enough for two.
 that night, in secret, set for two;
 so pious, and so clever too,
 Chapter Two
 out of this world will crowd us too.
 can chatter, and be silent too,
 But dinner's served, so two by two
 Notes to Chapter Two
 let evening pass, tomorrow too --
 still meek, still deaf as howd'youdo,
 I married. I beseech you, go;
 a frequent question: ``tell me who
 with a Venetian maiden who
 was brought there by a huckster who
 it will be our descendants who
 glitter and tumble as they go,
 have drenched the steel bit as they go
 song, laughter, whistle, bark and champ,
 almost as good as a dim lamp.
 by judgement of the modern camp
 and human words, and horse's stamp!
 of spires and belfries, in a cup
 a quilted chamber-robe and cap.
 with a small tray and a teacup.
 wine of the Comet6 fills the cup;
 the wine-addict adores the cup:
 recall, by its bewitching cup,
 the joys of youth, that festal cup,
 punctilious in his cotton cap,
 in flannel, and an old fur cap.
 with sheer enchantment fills her cup!
 their hand to grapple slander's cup,
 my student cell: she opened up
 land where I learned to love and weep,
 and all the world is buried deep.
 land where my heart is buried deep.
 mountains will part; below the deep,
 the maidens all are slumbering deep.
 henceforth in front of you I weep,
 a tear for him... but what's to weep?
 ``So let it be! for you to keep
 over the waters in a sweep;
 across each bush, across each steep,
 the heartache that they bring lies deep.
 though cold I am and sad; in sleep
 Only Tatyana does not sleep,
 Two hearts there are perhaps that keep
 here's Petushk&oacute;v, the local fop;
 he arrives - the cork goes flying up,
 himself just like a simple chap.
 upon her feverish tongue; the slip
 and, any moment, down he'll slip.
 she never even bit her lip.
 and introduced, for the last lap,
 delicious novels, laps them up;
 with parks and mansions, open up.
 the floor serves Triquet for his nap,
 neighbours and friends in kindly group,
 a plain, unceremonious troop,
 sometimes he'd fall into a trap
 has opened up his serving-trap.
 bassoons and flutes begin to trip.
 taken the saucers in their grip,
 the letter trembles in her grip;
 paled, flushed, or lost composure's grip --
 will find the ice elude his grip
 my last poor lepton for a sup!
 from thirty down to two; and stop,
 ``Get up, my child, it's time, get up!
 in his defence, and smash it up;
 they shove each plate, and every chair,
 the girl's pale charms, her loosened hair,
 Moscow's the place, the marriage-fair!
 or did her grief soon find repair?
 she's up and flying through the air
 don't waste your efforts on the air.
 and shout, and make room for the pair.
 the moon in its azure of air.
 exists for me one special pair!
 deaf to the voice of your despair?
 in, past concierge, up marble stair
 her heart had spoken, free as air,
 a deft arrangement to his hair,
 of Twelfth Night's chillest, iciest air.
 ``Here, near Saint Simeon; in December,
 Grandison, cousin, d'you remember?''
 comes for awakening, comes for slumber;
 Whether the arrow has my number,
 Back to his regiment the Lancer,
 but here comes our loud-talking prancer
 in corners whispering girls concur;
 and yet in vain ennui I squander
 myself and Eugene, lest a reader
 of mocking turn, or else a breeder
 your loved one, honourable reader!
 in winter, on the cast-iron fender,
 Who taught her an address so tender,
 Don't let a ghost be your bear-leader,
 such careless language of surrender?
 My love for it is just as tender,
 ``Could I just see the house, I wonder?''
 ``Can it be she?'' Eugene in wonder
 her heart speaks to her even louder
 in my long task, be my upholder,
 Her passion burns with stronger powder
 I drag my footsteps hither, yonder;
 the whole thieves' kitchen flies asunder,
 that huge ballrooms vibrated under,
 Enough. The load is off my shoulder!
 rushed to Anisia's room, to plunder
 from deepest backwood, furthest under...''
 ``She's mine!'' Evgeny's voice of thunder
 Now the mazurka sounds. Its thunder
 to see the grave, and shed a tear.
 oh, &agrave; propos: Larin's a dear
 and from within come noise and cheer;
 by waters that were still and clear,
 and exclamations, and good cheer.
 my soul had heard your voice ring clear,
 as gay as morning and as clear,
 an urge to sleep; soon, clear as clear,
 villages flickered far and near,
 sweet as a lover's kiss, and dear,
 so Lensky answered the old dear:
 for the first time the Muse came near.
 unseen, already you were dear,
 ditty portends a loss; more dear
 with fright, she hears the approaching bear;
 Those friends, those friends! it is, I fear,
 Buy&aacute;nov tried - got flea in ear.
 open the window, sit down near.''
 as linen's brought for him to wear.
 The olden days, I want to hear...''
 our friend Kat&eacute;nin8 brought to bear
 the talk of guests when they appear;
 Tatyana seeks to attune her ear,
 at the same moment in her ear:
 ``How Tanya's grown! I pulled your ear
 Never come and overhear
 the hunter in the wood will swear
 is ``Kit''3 to every maiden's ear.
 This dear, still world I must forswear
 word on his lips, and thought: it's sheer
 my golden days when spring was dear?
 how brilliant with its instant tear!
 Sunk in dejection, she won't hear
 ``Look quickly to the left, d'you hear?''
 touches her hand, or throws a fur
 had been for ever borne off far
 no, Tanya's more endearing far.
 would fill Tatyana from afar
 when we see him from afar,
 ladies at the fireside confer,
 roamed the still forest like a ranger,
 but from her shaggy-liveried ranger
 sought in her book, that text of danger
 who walks with sorrow, and with danger,
 A backward look is fraught with danger;
 by fate's decree: this freakish stranger,
 some future dunce will point a finger
 ``I weep... In case there still should linger
 then know that your reproving finger,
 perhaps - for flattering hope will linger --
 Dawn comes in mist and chill; no longer
 Tatyana now need wait no longer.
 in pairs, their hunger driving stronger,
 ``this is the one!'' Ah, ever stronger,
 ``For then, Onegin, I was younger,
 what's more, I loved you; but my hunger,
 He gave three balls a year, and rather
 10 Dancer and choreographer.
 to kissing or caressing father
 After a fine career, his father
 she never joined, or skipped, but rather
 Our love is what they most abhor;
 Love passed, the Muse appeared, the weather
 I walk the shore,17 I watch the weather,
 hoar-frost and sun in freezing weather,
 His life went sailing in calm weather;
 and after jealousy's grim weather
 still shivering in the bitter weather
 No ice and flame, no stormy weather
 bound where the magic bow will send her,
 But where, mid tragic storms that rend her,
 her soul's attention; just behind her
 Once Vy&aacute;zemsky,4 who chanced to find her
 For it was custom that consoled her
 soon a great truth came to enfold her
 The city's early sounds awake her;
 When comes my moment to untether?
 now free, I once more weave together
 So, verse and prose, they came together.
 Some neighbours there have come together;
 a joking flirt, or both together,
 I'll part them, bring them back together;
 ``Bliss was so near, so altogether
 their lords, and thwack their palms together;
 sledges, and tardy dawns together
 sometimes the evening brought together
 they talk of her, of how and whether:
 a wondrous tenderness. And whether
 is firmly cast. I don't know whether
 Hussars on leave are racing hither
 And not because she'd read him, either,
 Lovelace, or Grandison, or neither;
 Here insolent prize-dandies wither
 ``Olga,'' she thinks, ``what fate befell her?
 her heartache, did it long compel her,
 To my astonishment I've seen her,
 I would have found a friend, another,
 ``You pile one eclogue on another!
 long since, like brother linked to brother,
 became like brother knit to brother.
 for God's sake, that will do. But, brother,
 to a soir&eacute;e. ``My God! to her!...
 ``What nonsense, Tanya! in those other
 Foes! Is it long since from each other
 rendered them tedious to each other;
 why, at the thought, my husband's mother
 and in the role of virtuous mother
 around her neck, or when for her
 She's in the wood, the bear still trails her.
 now a protruding branch assails her
 by magic everything instils her
 into a corner, gently makes her
 alone with him; Onegin takes her
 all day, all night, his presence fills her,
 grey Filatevna, to present her
 At once Anisia came to greet her,
 and bending deeply down to greet her
 Ladies came over, crossed to meet her,
 the doorway opened wide to meet her,
 Tatyana's here, you know I've brought her...''
 has left, and no one here has met her...
 She hesitates, and doubts beset her:
 servant of God, and Brigadier.''
 8 Jean Sbogar, by Charles Nodier, 1818.
 and more than once the German baker,
 Necker
 Drive on, Andryushka! quicker, quicker!
 No moralizing from this joker;
 without preliminary feeler
 and nothing pierced his senses' blur.
 Here with his wife, that bulging charmer,
 Pistols are out, they gleam, the hammer
 faceted muzzles by the rammer;
 Gvozd&iacute;n, exemplary farmer,
 and the young city-bred newcomer,
 it's like a vanishing newcomer --
 The vote was passed without demur.
 He cursed Theocritus and Homer,
 Farewell, Petrovsky Castle, glimmer
 drive on! And now we see a-shimmer
 while dear Tatyana's youth grows dimmer:
 and health, life's sweetness and its shimmer,
 the lover of Julie Wolmar,3
 Our evanescent northern summer
 who in the country spends her summer,
 of passion's out, and its whole manner
 When we've retreated to the banner
 While under the connubial banner
 exercised, under lucre's banner,
 a novel in Lafontaine's8 manner...
 5 Lover of Val&eacute;rie, by Madame de Krudener, 1803.
 but just to make the bargain keener,
 into the mud, a drunken goner,
 you newborn work, and like a winner
 ``Here in the winter he'd have dinner
 he fed on hope's deceptive dinner;
 In heart's affairs, a sweet beginner,
 Please follow me. And here's the inner
 and tea and supper; there's an inner
 I'll feed the journalists for dinner
 I like to tell the time by dinner
 and Malek Adel,4 de Linar,5
 but, when he'd rushed to Uncle's manor,
 unswerving friend, correct landowner,
 Meanwhile another new landowner
 19 Refers to the Circassian girl in Pushkin's poem The Caucasian Prisoner.
 Exhausted by the ballroom's clamour,
 and looked for Lensky, while the labour
 Let's go, our friendship's worth the labour!''
 Now Latin's gone quite out of favour;
 he sleeps, away from glare and glamour,
 to liven with a silk atour
 No, soon she changed her old demeanour:
 having by her severe demeanour
 Onegin knew enough to savour
 of the dull shores of my disfavour,
 her Russian was as thin as vapour,
 or, after some dull dinner's labour,
 to mourn for Russia's gloomy savour,
 the cabinet behind the door
 he carries her inside the door
 November stood outside the door.
 whispers some ballad of the hour,
 clock in the country rings the hour;
 all stand. He walks towards the door.
 the logs; the wild ones have the floor;
 from table, clattering on the floor;
 and sets her gently on the floor.
 one customary grief each hour!
 I buttonhole a wandering neighbour
 by way of toast to their fair neighbour;
 Olinka yawned, just like her neighbour,
 ``Let's go.'' The friends, all haste and vigour,
 are treated to the fullest rigour
 the linen stretched on the tambour.
 Then with a half-ethereal splendour,
 and brandishes her tinsel splendour
 like Regulus, that god of honour,
 Chapter Four
 Notes to Chapter Four
 ``She knows you?'' ``Why, we lived next door.''
 my inept pupil, at that hour,
 ``Then, in the backwoods, far from rumour
 I'd nothing to attract your humour...
 Give me a pen and give me paper,
 she never read a Russian paper,
 bring up a table, and a taper;
 it frankly, I'm a firm adorer
 To me, unsmiling lips bring terror,
 oh! her young dove, the natural hearer
 however scarlet; free from error
 of secrets, like a friend but dearer,
 Who'll never fault our vices, or
 Eugene was free, and as a dresser
 made London's dandy his professor.
 it's yes or no, but never sir.''
 there was a general furtive chatter,
 just look, and never mind the chatter...
 that we enjoy equating chatter
 he fled from their resounding chatter!
 No, incorrect and careless chatter,
 Revenge's hour is near, and after
 pale transcript of a vivid master,
 ``Look to the left? where? what's the matter?''
 The world of fashion, prone to flatter,
 Conjecture found unending matter:
 spelt hazard, ruin and disaster;
 What do I want? what am I after,
 fraught with enticement and disaster?
 I'll go, I'll go!'' - and in a stir
 two poles that ice had glued like plaster
 ``Why not?'' ``I'd choose the other quarter
 could they not give each other quarter
 evoke emotion's pitter-patter,
 true, with a pistol he could shatter
 find, in the trivial, serious matter;
 for the footlights, this fickle traitor
 Their talk, so sound on every matter,
 add vale when he signed a letter;
 But go he won't: for him, a letter
 Vladimir Lensky, whose creator
 lightly attired, like the creator
 Don Juan's and the Giaour's creator,
 Softly the door is opened, enter
 of seeing the world? what on earth could be better?''
 a blank default would suit me better.
 cold reason, sleep in sensual welter
 with his forefathers would seem better;
 No answer comes. He goes, for better
 No answer comes. Another letter
 ``My sweet, God warrants me your debtor.''
 make Juvenal his text, or better
 like a drunk traveller in a shelter,
 between two aunts, in pillared shelter,
 ``Then send your grandson with this letter
 Noise, laughter, bowing, helter-skelter
 But that's enough. My beauty's letter
 Who could have looked the poet better,
 Evgeny, full of inward laughter,
 ``The one you love's the younger daughter?''
 but the unbending goddess-daughter
 I know to what malicious laughter
 each coldly plans the other's slaughter...
 or else a novel.'' ``And my daughter
 ``The Lord God be with you, my daughter!''
 In the dark sky, a shooting star
 still as a shadow, grim and bitter;
 she found Evgeny, eyes a-glitter,
 The night has many stars that glitter,
 Longtime inside this modish cloister,
 8 Francesco Albani, Italian painter (1578-1660).
 panes patterned by the finest printer,
 It's late. A breeze begins to roister,
 and hills that delicately winter
 but brighter than the heavenly litter,
 He's off - this ruthless legislator
 on cups of coffee, and then later
 he'd swim this Hellespont; then later
 two or three novels where our later
 was G&ouml;ttingen, his alma mater,
 and so your faithfullest supporter
 no, nothing caused his heart to stir,
 and parted from her by their star.
 7 Dominique de Pradt (1759-1837), voluminous French political writer.
 he'd listen to the administrator;
 and soon they bring her... a guitar
 of Neva's proud imperial water,
 I'll sprinkle you with holy water,
 but your vile Helen's not my star --
 simple old lady; but the liquor --
 with an obeisance I'll hand over...
 Tatyana's letter, treasured ever
 ``She's not in love?'' ``There's no one, ever.
 Onegin turns, and with a shiver
 led to the princess, all a-shiver,
 and put our heart into a shiver
 and so in winter-fields will shiver
 that fell, and then began to shiver,
 even in joke the heart won't shiver.
 complete with broad-brimmed bolivar,
 so gloriously he'd fool the clever,
 glitters beneath its icing-sliver;
 There sings the nightingale, spring's lover,
 and Dunya works the samovar;
 ``To...?'' ``Larina.'' ``Tatyana? never!''
 I read with secret pain, and never
 And he was loved... at least he never
 to it the people's blessing never
 Russia's Terpsichore, shall never
 And Ivan Petushk&oacute;v; no, never.
 Present me, please.'' ``You're joking.'' ``Never.''
 that raves with poetry can ever
 to Evgeny. Oh, God, she'd never...
 And yet that goddess whom I'd never
 importune with my lyre, whenever
 ``Another!... No, another never
 Ah, he had loved a love that never
 Happy a hundredfold, whoever
 from drowning's death in Lethe river
 Like modish parquetry, the river
 your chorus, is it dead for ever?
 Fare thee well, and if for ever,
 maybe bore off with it for ever
 Decreed in highest court for ever...
 toward the neighbouring valley's river.
 on Finland's coast a lonely rover --
 for me to glimpse this Phyllis ever
 Time was, he'd been the wittiest ever,
 ``You're married? No idea whatever...
 Killed!... At this frightful word a-quiver,
 Perhaps, when thoughts are all a-quiver
 And someone's heart will feel a quiver,
 he's up the steps, with heart a-quiver
 not once a day a thought will quiver,
 So the poor butterfly will quiver
 her face would pale, she'd start to quiver.
 dip in their jugs; where shadows quiver
 He asks. She can't accept. Why ever?
 with brilliant conquests by the shower,
 squeezes her hand - and brings to flower
 You too, prime beauties in your flower
 his freedom, in his youth's first flower,
 Lensky at home awaits the answer,
 Presently Olga's ringing answer
 no fuss; our belly has the power
 not separation's chilling power,
 by drozhkies jaunting at full power
 so nearly had them in his power.
 to encase herself inside a layer
 to whisper it her inmost prayer.
 he's at the club, a real stayer,
 the only face to shake and pass
 sit on a flimsy bench, and lays
 brings out its faro pack, and deals.
 its newness with our faded days,
 that lives, and glitters, and endears,
 to scorn the men with whom he deals;
 no move she makes, no breath she draws;
 those monkeys of the good old days:
 such shadowy and leisured ways,
 I'll set two ages by the ears.
 threats, vows, and simulated fears,
 still dim, through crystal's magic glass,
 the moon; but in the darkened glass
 with the resounding chime of glass.
 he'll spend before the looking-glass,
 of absence on my wandering ways!
 the winter's ways are smooth as glass.
 will blossom into splendid highways:
 the friends' salute she never hears
 its pristine charm: heeltaps, and leaps,
 then from his cabinet he'll pass
 she blossomed in the graceful ways
 of Moscow in the mournful days
 and life celestial's phantom gleams,
 Russia's old glories and their gleams,
 with her own forests and her meads...
 what moves along the hidden ways
 the simple faith of olden days
 before my gaze began to pass.
 shall I see you?'' As Tanya speaks
 but hold my tongue, lest it appears
 and on her lips a light smile plays.
 (my tale's beginning here repeats);
 and soon, oh soon the storm's arrears
 stuff of the poet's hallowed dreams!
 the heart and all its fragile dreams.
 I'm wandering in a world of dreams...
 right from the cradle of her days;
 inherited from earlier days
 and rest myself from earlier days.
 O, never know these frightful dreams,
 And so they lived, two ageing mortals,
 to the beginning of our days.
 as the perfection of our days!
 I thought, she'll go this time, perhaps;
 into the tomb's wide open portals,
 to sleep some black and empty dreams;
 for jokes, and rows, and merry dreams!
 yes, these were our forefathers' ways,
 how pleasantly the stages pass.
 the bear has raised her in his paws;
 another, freakish one, who stays
 and on her cheeks the fever stays,
 jaws masticate as minutes pass:
 by six-page letters, rings and tears,
 and than these letters, and these tears.
 I'm grieving still, but no more tears,
 that once I spent my happiest days?
 and from her eyes the eager tears
 and thought, a sleepy numbness steals;
 I shall set out on brand-new ways
 The comrade of so many days,
 sweet talk with friends. How many days
 But he, by sad and rocky ways,
 for dance, and din, and worldly ways,
 ``No, every minute of my days,
 five hundred years) for sure our byways
 oblivion of life's stormy ways,
 adorning all its country ways.
 At least you then showed for my years
 with bended knees a windmill dances,
 From early on she loved romances,
 recalling earlier time's romances,
 its sails go flap-flap as it prances;
 but in Zaretsky he induces
 and trains a mirror till it faces
 Bokharans, orchards, merchants, shacks,
 to expose to Moscow fops and Circes
 in country towns and suchlike places
 that ardent youth entirely lacks;
 goes out into the courtyard spaces
 Lord Byron, with his shrewd caprices,
 to all the most adored actrices,
 at first by Moscow's youthful graces
 And in their daughters' close embraces
 it blabs, and spills them in its tracks.
 as fresh as ever, for its graces
 boulevards, chemists, and Cossacks,
 and, in the yard, stand eighteen jades.
 And with a smile the world caressed us:
 aged Derzh&aacute;vin1 saw and blessed us
 But when a later age has found us,
 Who'll sow no calumnies around us?
 as when chill autumn rains surround us,
 Whose fond attentions will astound us?
 Evening, and darkening sky, and waters
 lorgnettes of jealous fashion-leaders,
 a raging torrent, capped with breakers,
 to happen long ago, dear readers,
 at a friend's word, a girl's caress.
 But the swift summer-time proceeds --
 no proud pretentions to success,
 he doesn't hear when I address
 an elegy to her address,
 bespectacled, in tattered dress;
 the ladies' calculated dress;
 I've seen how, trustful in his blindness,
 at least by a regretful kindness;
 the crush, the glitter and the gladness,
 These days I'm finding even gladness,
 Christmas came on. What joy, what gladness!
 the atmosphere of youth and madness,
 I suffered once from all the madness
 no, all devoured by passion's madness
 Yes, youth divines, in giddy madness,
 then dress...
 by now he's driving home to dress.
 or kiss the border of her dress.
 you age, and life's just grief and sadness...''
 a Muscovite in Harold's dress,
 Eugene's a pedant in his dress,
 No one's, I swear by God! in sadness
 that youthful soul, which pined for sadness;
 and locked him in a dark recess.
 with passion and with shrewd obliqueness
 and clasps her neck; and now she sees
 fieldward, in noisy swarm, the bees.
 gazes at him... and nonetheless,
 Full of obedience and demureness,
 poetic in her simple pureness,
 ghostlike, must trouble him who feels --
 a shadow, null and meaningless,
 Alas, it's not so hard to guess!
 the tears in stream pour down her cheeks.
 am I estranged, does all that cheers,
 across our snows of northern bleakness
 Nursed in the orient's languid weakness,
 stalking the momentary weakness,
 There's powdery snow up to her knees;
 till Moscow, meekly on its knees,
 and whiskers - all of this it keeps
 at this betrayal's fateful news?
 the party waits. Seized with an illness
 is on his feet - in utter stillness
 by dull eternity's purlieus,
 for you, I think, the humble dimness
 the odious bear still grunts and lumbers.
 Ahead of them a pinewood slumbers
 that could sustain it? Only grimness;
 I love their feet - though I confess
 But now Aurora's crimson fingers
 gave up the ancient Kremlin-keys:
 the morning light no longer lingers,
 the imperturbable princess.
 and friend Evgeny. The princess
 adorns Aunt Helen, the princess;
 and from the salon the princess,
 Then doors are opened, Lensky enters,
 the country cottages and hovels,
 what occupied his chafing powers
 in fact a thorough fop, no less.
 to her flower-garden, to her novels, --
 but Eugene's out from din and press:
 no haughty stare around the press,
 propped in the door among the press.
 they all still keep their old impress:
 We all resemble more or less
 The choirs of dancers sought their quarters.
 ``Ah, Tanya, come to me, it seems
 there's no ignoble tale that seems
 feeling to what had long been heartless:
 with an avowal just as artless;
 and racking with their strain and stress
 to play with a dishevelled tress,
 There, with epigrammatic neatness,
 where (standard rhyme) are youth and fleetness?
 against the tea's excessive sweetness,
 across the public's toes; he steers
 O dreams, o dreams, where is your sweetness?
 on unknown ladies in the tiers;
 and ananas, the gold of trees.
 they're all chained up in different fetters,
 his soul with murmurs of distress.
 He'd given up girls - now gave up letters,
 retired, forgotten by his brothers,
 passion's rough language talked by others,
 in sledded coaches and coup&eacute;s,
 tracked him, and put him in duress,
 Strike the ditty up, my sweets,
 ``A place where you'll find none of us.''
 and feather-beds, and birds in cages,
 parks, monasteries, towers and ledges,
 in britzkas, kib&iacute;tkas and sleighs.
 peasants, and fashion-shops, and sledges,
 But now our roads are bad, the ages
 the prejudices of the ages,
 (vain twaddle, fables of the ages,
 Love tyrannises all the ages;
 with broods of children of all ages,
 sensitive ladies of all ages --
 the secrets of the grave, the pages
 Of those who heard my opening pages
 but in it there are certain pages
 a blessing from its blasts and rages,
 as Sadi17 sang in earlier ages,
 There's din of parting now that rages,
 and the Skot&iacute;nins, grizzled sages,
 Priam-like agricultural sages,
 and bedbug that infest the stages
 a rest from toil and all its aches,
 frontwise and back, that way and this.
 if I show wit in jesting thus.
 you learn life's sweetness, and with this
 The protocol is all one wishes:
 the jams appear in little dishes;
 Onegin spoke about its flights
 she spins and, friend of winter nights,
 the matchwood chatters as it lights.
 then quickly something changed all this:
 I've learnt new sadness; but in this
 their breed would (some years after this)
 I find no sense; the truth is this,
 beneath bird-cherries and acacias
 damns the intruders; Tanya lies
 for planting cabbage, like Horatius,
 evoke for you a sombre bliss;
 it's not in him to bring me bliss.''
 and that embittered mind which boils
 doubted of it, so lived in bliss.
 in sighs and boredom and deceits
 cheek upon hand she softly cries
 printed among outmoded airs;
 in a still stream that never dries.
 by any itch for marriage ties;
 while odes have high and noble aims...''
 through the back porch runs out and flies
 look through the pane, and squash the flies.
 is there to lisp its pack of lies.
 upon her lips the breathing dies,
 pans, mattresses, and trunks, and chairs,
 just what the nightmare signifies.
 the earlier griefs are what I miss.
 (the reader thinks the rhyme is lilies:
 in dream toward the woods and plains,
 look here, as a provincial miss
 empty the purpose it proclaims,
 the funeral monument explains:
 with tears, in quarters of the maids:
 above the dust of his remains
 she fell in love with all the fancies
 of Dian's visage, in our fancies
 brushes for teeth, brushes for nails.
 the tusks, the corpse's finger-nails,
 flicker of swiftly twirling pairs,
 the prince looks at him, and replies:
 a Russian hammer-blow, repairs
 cherries throw and raspberries
 of Bogdan&oacute;vich's11 refrains.
 like native idiom from their lips?
 My pen, as once, no longer hurries
 her out-of-fashion clothes!... oh, mercies!
 she finds it stifling here... she strains
 as youthful sinning, or the strains
 and other, more exacting worries,
 can lean on faith, who can dismiss
 resigned himself to prison's ties,
 All are dumbfounded. Lensky shies
 plagued by her ghastly dream, and tries
 you object of my guileless ditties!
 the bleeding tongues, the tufted tails,
 in empty deeds and futile toils.
 And of the cupboards, one contains
 and almost swoons, and almost dies.
 no trace of ink, no spots, no stains.
 of goblets, tall and slender pretties;
 and it's the foreign phrase that trips
 and says: ``Farewell, you vales and fountains!
 farewell you too, familiar mountains!
 Of course, the love of tender beauties,
 that generations of new beauties,
 that verse will turn to useful duties;
 8 Playwrights of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
 will loyally discharge its duties,
 to wave farewell the household waits
 of swooning, Tanya nearly dies;
 the album of a country miss
 or just grammatical mistakes,
 the early pealing of the bells
 brushes on thirty different scales;
 and hetman of the gambling-halls,
 the snow from all surrounding hills;
 ``Come to me in my golden halls.''
 boys, country women, stately halls,
 Hoar-frost that crackles with a will is
 lies in a coverlet that ripples
 She's here, she spreads abroad; she stipples
 down to the plain in turbid rills.
 his wit, according to the rules
 using overt or covert rules.
 the boxes; boiling, pit and stalls;
 Street lamps go flashing by, and stalls,
 in boxes or the rows of stalls.
 lifts her from bed as it foretells
 or quizzing-glasses of know-alls
 the horns, and the moustachio'd nozzles --
 the eyes of all, the hooves, the snozzles,
 how many lines of verse, and themes
 and tea's brought in. Instead of chimes
 you've made so many secret rhymes,
 for whom, to expiate your crimes,
 eight rubbers; and by now eight times
 insists, when the mazurka ends,
 3 Hero of Louvet's novel about betrayed husbands.
 The yard was bursting with dependants;
 friends, foes, priests, guests, inured attendants
 and neighbours, followed the same ends.
 and tedious means to festive ends.
 haphazard; so, to God be thanks,
 frost gleams. We watch with gleeful thanks
 forgot to think of town and friends
 dear companions, darling friends,
 on most occasions between friends,
 for them by fathers who, as friends
 on this unstable life, my friends!
 By enemies, no less by friends
 and by Repentance. All this lends,
 the valley's dark. The forest lands
 But in that desert his attainments
 Lensky disliked the entertainments
 persisted and made no amends.
 on the cotillion, as amends.
 old mother winter at her pranks.
 to pass for cultured in our ranks.
 as if spellbound, Tatyana stands.
 she visited the humble tents
 I know too surely how it ends.
 its glaring feasts, and shrill events,
 another of the ball-dictators,
 attract the sneering of the jealous,
 a fashion-plate for illustrators,
 convinced at heart that my most zealous
 entered his sentence in the books.
 nor will my scribbling in such books
 and now it's Bordeaux the Judicious
 and in the eyes of the judicious
 Is it that we've become officious
 for the bleak tongue of boorish clods --
 I still find Gallicism delicious
 ladies of riper years, delicious
 we'll go with her to that delicious
 Yet hissing froth deals a malicious,
 To be a butt for the malicious
 in rose-trimmed bonnets, but malicious;
 He was the slave of a tenacious,
 your battles, lawless and atrocious,
 and though my muse may be capricious,
 your heroes, raging and ferocious,
 too weak to change, I'm staying vicious,
 However has he earned so vicious,
 objective of his thoughts and joys:
 But friendship, as between our heroes,
 project in silhouette the tops
 she lost the language of the gods
 so brilliantly he'd hoax the fools,
 but whispers, the guffaw of fools...''
 feeling is quaint, and fit for fools.
 girl reapers as the streamlet flows
 mills, lands and waters - he whose goods
 yes, even there its triumph grows.
 in indolence and in rampageous
 Let me look back. Farewell, umbrageous
 the Muses' lofty arts and fashions,
 of ladies and of freakish fops.
 till now our language - proud, God knows --
 And what's more, they're so supercilious,
 unanimous exchange of looks
 nonsense will earn indulgent looks,
 so circumspect, and so punctilious,
 as fate's mysterious purpose burrows,
 of useful objects that the curious
 of sudden brightness... it's too curious...
 eyes rolling, arms uplifted, furious,
 reap a brief harvest on their furrows;
 to comfort her in all her woes,
 and act the humble or imperious,
 in albums, blunted the censorious
 For goodness' sake, you can't be serious
 my task, so vivid and so serious
 the indifferent, or the deadly serious!
 There was - --,10 so notorious
 And my companion, so mysterious,
 ``At the Larins'!'' ``But how mysterious.
 or for the modishly luxurious --
 for the sublime, and for the passions
 Alone amid all his possessions,
 it led him, in these early sessions,
 thank you for suffering and its joys,
 beds, bridges, lawn, she never stops,
 for us are instruments and tools;
 No secret crimes, and no perditions,
 a Russian family's old traditions;
 Legends, and mystical traditions,
 for 1808: his obligations
 a book of household calculations,
 the legatee of his relations --
 rumours and threats and premonitions,
 the safest place for declarations,
 In days of carefree aspirations,
 Such were a young rake's meditations --
 (an attribute that's quite vexatious,
 the total ownership of woods,
 Ah, gently, gently, easy goes --
 and by the sound of silly joys.
 fixing an early rendezvous
 across the drift-encumbered acres,
 no mansions, no ballrooms, no bards.
 poor Tanya more intensely burns;
 a fop, a punter on the cards,
 although there are no streets, no cards,
 its views, its passions, or its cares!
 Triquet, ingenious poet, dares
 in that one sound, for Russian hearts!
 to me so simply, with the fires
 The Song of the Girls
 the ring of marriageable girls --
 bludgeon the sense; it faints and whirls.
 although one in no manner shares
 The crush, the heat, as music blares,
 the modish Record Office clerks
 some disagreeable remarks.
 the guests squeeze closer to the centres;
 defeated, turned up at his neighbour's.
 O rus!
 1 Caf&eacute;-restaurant in Paris.
 what store of riches it imparts!
 and force that purity inspires,
 sleep runs from her, she turns and turns...
 It's time: kind-hearted, idle creatures,
 calm men with beatific features,
 and junior Ensign in the Guards.
 Europe's most finely chiselled wares
 and jam in jars, and household wares,
 old prejudice; all men are zeros,
 his thrusting horns, and as he passes
 has come with Kharlikov; he passes
 Here, in his red peruke and glasses,
 behind the door the clash of glasses
 blush to descry in looking-glasses
 straight to his stall, then turns his glasses
 High rank, of course, and fashion's glasses,
 Applause. Onegin enters - passes
 Tatyana looks, her faintness passes:
 even in novels, vice entraps us,
 Today a mental fog enwraps us,
 the inevitable silly asses,
 Onegin comes, and makes excuses;
 Each others' and their own successes,
 the beauties in their flimsy dresses,
 and so the harmless chat progresses
 addressed to Tanya, certain verses
 in Olga everything expresses --
 twirls the other slowly as she pleases,
 the swarm, the glittering mob that presses,
 Melmoth,7 whose roaming never ceases,
 as smoke in azure sky disperses.
 no one recalls him or his verses;
 the skyblue eyes, the flaxen tresses,
 La morale est dans la nature des choses.
 and, on the crosses, jackdaw hosts.
 Young ladies jump for future blisses...
 the footmen sleep on the pelisses;
 round Tanya congregate the misses,
 this denizen of the coulisses
 Some days he's still in bed, and drowses,
 Along the fronts of darkened houses,
 along the street where slumber drowses,
 What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
 lions adorning gateway posts
 culture, so far from healing, hurts us;
 with eyes aflame Onegin rises
 but then a sudden breeze surprises,
 We must confess that taste deserts us
 frightening with all despair's disguises,
 inside a pocket Triquet nurses,
 an ode in twenty-five cantos.
 To live, it hurries, and to feel it hastes.
 menu, hung up for show, excites
 ``Qu'&eacute;crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?''
 but from our friends, good Lord protect us!
 (it's all the same - you well correct us),
 for the two ladies at the gates.
 the thoughts of my two anchorites.
 all sorts of hopeless appetites;
 ``You criticize Moscow? why make such a fuss
 he rested - wept for by his neighbours,
 watched sun and clock - then by such labours
 Just before dinner, from his labours
 throughout the boredom of the hours --
 12 French poet (1755-1814). Author of Po&eacute;sies Erotiques.
 the children spoilt, the mad, the rogues
 critics and their capricious vogues,
 or make men seriously discuss
 then, help me God, she caterwauls:
 an album's loose and floating sheaves.
 for Olga's beauty, Lensky gives
 is only Olga: he relieves
 that fills him and in which he lives.
 to lie down at her feet like slaves!
 like a majestic moon, she drives
 while roar of violins contrives
 among the maidens and the wives,
 how envious was I of the waves
 to drown the hiss of modish wives.
 Zar&eacute;tsky, sometime king of brawls
 and up the rustling curtain crawls.
 away from trusting his own eyes.
 down to the garden, and her eyes
 and, scroll in hand, before her eyes
 noise in her ears, glare in her eyes...
 stripping my soul before your eyes!
 when our Zaretsky met his eyes.
 of kindling smiles in ladies' eyes.
 like fluff before Aeolian breezes;
 How well he donned new shapes and sizes --
 &lt; ...
 ... &gt;2
 ``Go, nurse, and leave me here apart.
 that Lensky and Eugene, apart,
 fly to my corner like a dart,
 in showing how to tell apart
 What of it? it's euphonious, pleasant,
 With a sharp epigram it's pleasant
 the lust for blood drew them apart?
 and granite, were so far apart.
 heaven's will - for you I'm set apart;
 can it be true you must await
 need not have bristled like a beast;
 amidst the howling and the blast
 has felt time's desiccating blast?
 with sabre's slash, and bullet's blast.
 I've paid my due to classic art:
 for him, the objective on life's chart
 drawn from a dim, warm-hearted past,
 you took an honourable part --
 passion and dreams of pensive cast.
 the marriage plans were all exact
 it would be painful to depart
 after Saint Chariton's gone past
 but held up by the simple fact
 despite herself, rehearsed the part:
 the ardent author of the past
 about what's buried in the past:
 and when, by misty moon, the east
 was just created for the part.
 but now I've rather lost the art.
 study where he would sleep and feast
 and plaits a piebald shoe of bast;
 to each and every raving feast
 and fastens, like a term of art,
 and with a halting, trembling gait
 whether it goes careering past,
 the hostess cries and, moving fast,
 it lacked, of course, poetic heart,
 they shared their days in deed and heart,
 the blood within my withered heart,
 a full confession of the heart.
 the wilful fancies of the heart.
 through distant regions of the heart...
 my tongue kept drawing from the heart --
 with bursts of passion from the heart,
 At first, disparity of heart
 sing God knows whom, compose with art
 as if a cold hand squeezed her heart,
 She looked across, felt in her heart
 wound that had seared my Tanya's heart!
 one thing inspired his breath, his heart,
 Evgeny loved him from his heart,
 the uncertainties within his heart;
 my wretched Lensky in his heart
 by my Eugene, not for his heart,
 o fields - to you I'm vowed at heart.
 in the far backwoods' deepest heart,
 to all this tattle, yet at heart
 in all the world could take my heart!
 liven the drowsing of my heart,
 your grief would fail to touch my heart,
 I'm grateful now with all my heart.
 of hope sometimes disturbs my heart;
 without a word Tatyana leant
 the Russian for le comme il faut.
 with pleasure on his vengeful act.
 dreams of inconsequential cast,
 sharpness of wit, and social art,
 that youthful heart. ``But now at least
 you loved the opulent contact
 and faithful wife I'd have been cast.
 in your cal&egrave;che of foreign cast --
 the two foes stand with eyes downcast.
 Tatyana hears but takes no part;
 Then, crying, they untwined my plait,
 they'd just enrage it with their dart.
 for her instruction, and her breast
 she sits with head sunk on her breast,
 she treads our earth, and how her breast
 another's joy, another's breast,
 to feasts and fun this winter past;
 Believe (as conscience is my warrant),
 now as before, inside my breast;
 it may be late, but it's a start.
 with Guillot; while pourparlers last
 once more the love, once more the smart...
 in solitude, as at the start
 a faster, stronger pulsing start.
 of sense and judgement. For his part
 and self-oblivion was his art!
 of jealousy has made her start,
 in which his hero's mould was cast.
 as well-read, though of pedant cast.
 to catch the eye and to attract.
 from day to day she could but wait;
 choruses, Tanya can but wait,
 Onegin too. ``Good Lord, at last!''
 and should have played a different part:
 sorceress-winter's here at last.
 sing about something else at last!''
 yet he fell out of love at last
 of fallen glory. Well! don't wait,
 can it be true, their crown at last
 for the young pilgrim. So at last
 takes up an hour or two; at last
 all's well; the destined hour at last
 the big room, further, not a cat.
 and every man won't understand it
 or else... or else, may God forfend it!
 You too, mamas, I pray attend it,
 when hourly we ourselves betrayed it,
 let's go together, take a rest...
 where a sharp nail has made a dent.
 Alas, our youth was what we made it,
 startling the ingenuous with a jest,
 young poet, be for ever blest!''
 the hat, the scowling brow, the chest
 her seal with its engraven crest.
 who on a deuce, that famous cheat,
 and sat there as the minutes crept;
 Oh, I've no strength... I'm tired, my chest...
 she'll spin this way and that, and beat
 the new ballet he should be at.
 the girl's attentive eyes are bent.
 and has no knowledge of deceit?
 of rugs, and carpets' rich refinement.
 and fatherland and grim confinement?
 condemns the monde and its excitement;
 It baffles me. But I'll repeat
 their looks and language in deceit
 sent at the Colonel's own behest.
 there, where the coulisse entrance went,
 5 The week before Lent.
 and, as observer, to be present
 and yet inseparably present,
 the world and all its works, she wept
 now disenchanted with the next,
 he danced attendance with the best;
 amusing, flattering with the best,
 pen, tears, and rhymes, and all the rest?
 and yet in her you'd not detect --
 Tsimlyansky wine, between the meat
 I put your genius to the test,
 and the blancmanger, then a fleet
 Now Nature's tremulous, pale effect
 in other things you come off best:
 on me, all this has no effect:
 by clearing every sort of debt;
 and kisses smack as young girls greet;
 of Tanya's image... Ah, how great
 A ball: the joy of every guest!
 down from the porch, light as the lightest,
 when he arrived; not in the slightest:
 my word; no welshing, as I live. &gt;
 ``Goodbye, Onegin, time I went.''
 against each other swift, small feet.
 that somehow that same day we'll meet...
 upon it, and with head down-bent
 deceived, was overjoyed to rest.
 the wild rose blooms, and in the covert
 not only pain, too much to meet...
 has fixed; but for my heart to beat
 are just as nimble as their feet.
 wedlock for us would be abhorrent.
 Olinka and her mother sent:
 to clasp your knees, and at your feet
 the year, his age, then: ``may your rest,
 and cared not what his daughter kept
 cartoonist-pencils of Saint-Priest;11
 Now all was still. Tatyana slept.
 in the salon new faces meet,
 that's where my years of youth were spent.
 Eugene as clever, and quite sweet.
 is it that she, poor simple sweet,
 more and more bored by yearning's text,
 of ladies' heads, and ladies' feet;
 rigorously though you'd inspect --
 tradition still keeps my respect.
 a young girl's looking-glass is kept.
 remains unmoved: still he's persistent,
 active, and hopeful, and insistent:
 but where are all your evenings spent?''
 by way of secret tome that slept
 or of Ist&oacute;mina, my sweet,
 on her conquest, we leave my sweet;
 I'm good for nothing now, my sweet...
 The rustic sage, in that apartment,
 his housekeeper and her department
 Listen to me without resentment:
 girls often change to their contentment
 Tanya looks on; her own indictment
 before first light they have appointment,
 smoothe his way out with humour's ointment.
 and every plea that lips can treat;
 The World found this enough to treat
 no, forests are the sole retreat
 It's right and proper that you went.''
 has never staked his family seat.
 of certain ladies' tiny feet.
 to freedom, softness and enjoyment:
 and gave our heroine enjoyment
 Or from all notion of enjoyment
 and in retreat from all enjoyment
 and every day its own enjoyment?
 its work, its torture, its enjoyment,
 now crush with sorrow's dull deployment
 his young heyday's supreme employment,
 Worse luck, Larina crawled; the employment
 he ended even your employment;
 But was it happy, his employment,
 Was it not in such sweet employment
 But now! what brings you to my feet?
 came driving to his country seat,
 fire of the cutlets' scalding fat,
 some minutes long. The words won't fit
 should have been analysed when caught,
 and beat a nacreous wing when caught
 repeats what her mama has taught.
 blest... though perhaps her fancy's caught
 a glossary of smart argot...
 now sweet, his slumbers are distraught.
 into a small quit-rent - and got
 and satisfied with what he'd got,
 our deep economist had got
 her nerves, she leant on it her weight,
 Chapter Eight
 get two young friends to pick a fight,
 all of an emptiness so killing - &gt;
 this child of luxury and delight.
 They will receive us with delight.''
 in winter was her heart's delight.
 in their gay glass, the borrowed light
 shall my sad gaze no more alight
 bathed in the moon's inspiring light.
 she looks, the room is getting light --
 her path a hare in headlong flight
 again I see your soulful flight?
 the stars, the moon - celestial light
 Tatyana'd rise by candlelight.
 he drives there like a bird in flight,
 of distant countries, of moonlight...
 to steal away her neighbour's light
 in the mazurka he was light,
 to hear him howl: ``that's me!'' You'll get
 or dim her, dazzle as she might.
 just like a casual guest who might
 would Hymen bring us - blooms that might
 In second place the poet might
 last many a day, and many a night!
 with visions of enchanted night,
 solitude, stillness and the night,
 in the deep stillness of the night,
 outside and in they star the night;
 once more he can't await the night;
 seacoast, to hear in dark of night
 in fashion's din, at still of night,
 wakened at the same hour of night
 converting morning to midnight,
 by Neva, on a summer night,
 the happenings of the previous night;
 My early bird! you know, last night
 to horror-stories told at night
 found for its utterance that night.
 their hopes, their pranks, their dreams at night --
 ``Gladly.'' ``So when?'' ``Why not tonight?
 a simple Russian family night:
 is dear to me, for it has brought
 and I be by the world forgot;
 of life's repast betimes, nor sought
 and your sincerity of thought
 one leads the multitude in thought,
 and home he drives, deep-sunk in thought.
 to drain its beaker down, nor thought
 and prone to censure in our thought;
 in fact by some quite different thought.
 have been a fool; yet he'd a right,
 ran through the fields, sheer panic fright
 still everywhere the lamps are bright;
 that Menelaus was quite right --
 come to disturb me and affright.
 you gave me such a shocking fright!
 saw through the window, morning-bright,
 in first place - listen, am I right? --
 Where are you? come - and my own right
 Tanya comes to in utter fright...
 once more, at that beloved sight,
 may chorus, when she comes in sight,
 This world's so vacuous that it's got
 ``One winter's worth, you've surely got;
 who, in good time, would calmly get
 (a simile of this and that)
 killing each evening off like that?''
 from their own country? Then she shot
 and just a double charge of shot
 the gift of recognizing what
 quickly to O... I mean to that...
 so all went smoothly after that.
 He opens up a door. What's that
 a simple monument is built.
 13 French encyclopedist.
 poor girl, to drop into a faint,
 the heart of the professional flirt!
 of social buzz and modish riot,
 and evening now drew on in mist...
 madman, can you forget their print?
 And he remembers, in the quiet
 2 Count F. P. Tolstoy (1783-1873), well-known artist.
 what flowers of spring display your dint?
 but will, and reason's strong constraint,
 darkly above the water's lilt,
 smile, voice and movements, little waist --
 with trees decked in their silvery kit,
 across the stage; he yawns: ``Ballet --
 my life in a domestic plot;
 first, we'll take vanity, and let
 made over to them his whole lot,
 and jolly magpies on the flit,
 and, curious now about the lot,
 she roams the empty garden-plot...
 without a trace of spite or plot,
 his serfs rejoicing at their lot.
 will in a flash decide his lot.
 with cranium aching fit to split;
 From widow Clicquot and from Mo&euml;t,
 opens the door a tiny slot...
 husband and father as my lot;
 attainable!... But now my lot
 and with a sigh I now admit
 6 Vintage 1811, the year of the Comet.
 and sang me to the altar-mat.
 16 Millyonaya, a street parallel to the Neva, and one block away from it.
 with censure - I've done all to earn it!
 the homely scene, take pleasure in it --
 or borrow, say, from me, if not.''
 there's a small window shining in it,
 and where had he arrived from, not
 still made of tulle, the self-same bonnet
 Tatyana3 was her name... I own it,
 but it's the first time you'll have known it,
 Their look, though, shows no change upon it --
 we'll draw it deeper in our net;
 I acted thoughtlessly or not:
 in everything she sees there's not
 by decent company, has not,
 you're sure to find her portrait in it:
 but, lovely maiden, wilt thou not
 My heart awaits you: you can turn it
 onto the porch, and fussed about
 among the neighbours round about.
 We've many neighbours round about;
 and strip the forest round about.
 his dreams, while she whom they're about,
 blinded to everything about
 with lampions studded all about
 glitters with hoar-frost all about.
 Today it's turn and turn about.
 her steppeland charms into a rout.3
 and enviable for a poet,
 into the social whirlabout;
 of philosophic brains, about
 something to rack his brains about,
 with deep emotion looks about
 blue smoke of chimneys goes aloft,
 who was it that you dreamt about?''
 And how they weigh! I know about
 spared her the expense she dreaded most --
 the days that doom has measured out.
 so unforgiving a report?
 covered her face. When all came out
 suspecting wonders would come out.
 on the highroad the wolves come out;
 that, for all this, my shame's report
 even to count them throws me out.''
 shutters are opened and the soft
 no magic fancies of the poet,
 in frosted bottle, for the poet
 two pines have tangled at the root;
 at forty he'd have got the gout,
 of her own horses, not the post,
 in which, dear friends, we're all afloat!
 she burst into a coughing-bout.
 Her frightened cry brought running out
 Tanya today goes hurrying out
 a sham that trustful souls work out;
 the one who killed the youthful poet?''
 and to it, with a grave import,
 of the Terpsichorean foot.
 even by Ladies' Fashion Post,
 With that, in tears, and quite worn out,
 Tatyana struggles to run out --
 humbly I heard your lesson out?
 have pushed their frontiers further out,
 a secret truth, and at our cost
 to the Larins' had caused a spout
 blest the poor lover who reads out
 drunk, eaten, yawned, grown weak and stout,
 do fields echo with work and shout;
 the vital force gives them the shoot
 I'll save this blossom on the shoot,
 ``Make way, make way,'' goes up the shout;
 you'll read: here's Pradt,7 here's Walter Scott!
 one finds in war amusing sport,
 the sumptuous palais shines out;
 she flails around, she tries to shout --
 may wind up my career as poet;
 or Russia's chondria, for short;
 by some perverse schoolboy for sport;
 a life-creating voice was lost;
 shall not attack my lily's root;
 I have to drag my feet to it.
 flits Olga: ``now, tell me straight out,
 throw meadows into muddy rout,
 I ask you, each and every poet!
 Tatyana heard Evgeny out.
 the household boys in noisy rout;
 and good and bad are all mixed up. &gt;
 all these are charming! but to put
 not to see Olga; in a fret
 nor turned a poet. In the burst
 to stem the bloodstream's wild outburst;
 ``You're wrong.'' ``But what I wonder at
 youth which has nothing to regret,
 the neighbour... you must tell the brat
 prince, who in that dark-red b&eacute;ret,
 Already borne down by regret,
 but never asked her husband first.
 and, when one's least prepared for it
 to pine away from passion's thirst,
 and ruled him like an autocrat --
 after her own room, makes her fret.
 no spark of fun in all its rot!
 if her cross mood was at its worst --
 their tendency to call, and sit.
 shine out and bring the world to bliss. &gt;2
 Madame de Sta&euml;l, Bichat,13 Tissot,14
 of simple product supplements it.
 a nation's wealth is, what augments it,
 your heels will squash the ladies' toes! &gt;
 all others with a waistcoat's set
 or languid bosoms; and no visit
 finds her alone, and there they sit
 Then verdicts from her husband's quartet
 to pass the evening. No? then tot
 ``I don't see what's so bad about it.''
 ``Your modish world, I'll do without it;
 it held me captive; tit for tat,
 and cheers salute him. Tanya must
 for raking up historic dust
 earn us the favour of the Court?
 its grip on him, forgot to count
 or stirring annalistic must;
 by will of Zeus, the high and just,
 it's hidden deep in gloom and dust.
 sent to seduce? Resolve my doubt.
 as horses whirled him through the dust.
 thank him by curtseying to the dust;
 and good and ill, and learning's fruit,
 in his first dream of passion's fruit,
 of sumptuous flowers and luscious fruit.
 frozen in his tight-fitting suit;
 his itching verse, Monsieur Triquet
 late of Tambov, Monsieur Triquet
 his parents' patriarchal dust
 unconsciously he let it mount
 how well he knew the way to hurt --
 ladies who glide on waxed parquet.
 on ballroom's looking-glass parquet
 No matter; fate's decree is just.
 Alas! the generations must,
 on state affairs; there was a wit,
 full of his usual pith and wit,
 The book displayed, not so you'd know it,
 flown from society as we know it,
 in your pursuit I've come to know it:
 In this, dear reader, if you know it,
 the darling objects - don't you know it? --
 her kindness, move Tatyana; yet
 demanded. ``Yes, she looks... And yet...
 and then concludes: she loves him yet!
 before which life's horizon yet
 and watch your daughters closer yet,
 his foolish face; more pleasant yet
 devouring Gibbon and Rousseau,
 of Richardson and of Rousseau.
 3 Julie, ou la nouvelle H&eacute;loise. by Rousseau, 1761.
 spoke words of hope? But who are you:
 ``Well, I won't hold you up or bore you;
 But now - oh God! - the thought of you,
 And now, my friends, I hear from you
 really more bearable to you
 Friendship, as I must own to you,
 "When will the devil come for you?"''
 ``But I'm denied this: all for you
 or something tenderer still, for you.
 ``You're off? why, there's a poet for you!''
 I would have chosen none but you
 She faced him, questioning: ``But you?...''
 I'm at your service to protect you;
 You husbands, deeply I respect you!
 secretly overheard by you.
 V
 V
 V
 V
 V
 V
 V
 IV
 IV
 XV
 IV
 XV
 XV
 IV
 XV
 XV
 IV
 XV
 IV
 IV
 LV
 LV
 LIV
 LIV
 XLIV
 XLIV
 XLIV
 XLIV
 XLIV
 XLIV
 (XIII, XIV,) XV
 XXV
 XLV
 XLV
 XXV
 XIV
 XXV
 XLV
 XXV
 XLV
 XLV
 XXV
 XXV
 XIV
 XXV
 XIV
 XLV
 XIV
 XXV
 XIV
 XIV
 XIV
 XXXV
 XXXV
 XXIV
 XXIV
 Griboedov
 Dmitriev
 XXXII ends, is Pushkin's own contribution, a sample as it were of what he can do.'' Nabokov.
 XXXV
 XXXV
 XXXV
 XXIV
 Gvozd&iacute;n, Buy&aacute;nov, Petushk&oacute;v
 proclaims where ponderous P&uacute;styakov
 10 Magazine (1818) edited by A. Izmaylov.
 XXXV
 XXIV
 XXIV
 XXIV
 XXXV
 XXXV
 and look, my cousin's come, Buy&aacute;nov,
 and counsellor (retired) Fly&aacute;nov,
 XXIV
 XXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 and flown like arrows from a bow.
 and like an arrow from a bow
 of pity: in his silent bow,
 ``How can one not love mother Moscow?''
 to hide a hope, to make a show
 a parodistic raree-show?
 already yawned before the show,
 and finds the world a darkling show?
 we'll talk, and talk, and then we'll show
 must now employ my pen; somehow
 and in his look there shows somehow
 that one be shot just anyhow --
 to Tanya, all's an empty show.
 with the unmistakeable sideview
 the pages of some dull review,
 and, still transparent to the view,
 ancestral1 portraits met the view
 Guillot, behind a stump in view,
 I'll say: with past ideals in view
 the Corsair, or the Wandering Jew.
 must be my theme, if you'll allow.
 and empty gossip, you'll allow,
 with eyes of love, with greed to swallow
 a classicist, he'll not allow
 and autumn lingered, long and slow;
 too long he's hoaxed us high and low...''
 to Olga's face, he whispered low
 neighbour was sure, from this would flow
 ``It's nothing.'' And away he flew.
 and watch him stubbornly bring low
 of ardent speech, that aching flow
 he gazed out on the threatening glow.
 She's dropped her sash's silken billow;
 until the dawn beneath her pillow.
 and underneath her downy pillow
 It's agony to watch the hollow
 Proud Albion's lyre is what I follow,
 and with the decorous throng to follow
 to see you, faithfully to follow,
 the man who laid her brother low.
 as by the shortest way they flew,
 with each nuance of wintry glow:
 at some dull aunt's, sat down and knew
 the altar flame's extinguished now.
 Why then do you pursue me now?
 than most. Evgeny, though he knew
 a cheerful glimmer on the snow
 only in January the snow,
 and little dancing whirls of snow
 and crisply crunch the morning snow.
 of lovelorn girls was nothing new?
 I gave my word, alas, though now
 now I've forgotten all I knew.
 the jagged flint's pulled back anew.
 Ah, all that my Onegin knew...
 fir, forest, hedgehog, raven, snow
 Onegin swiftly came to know
 a soul that nothing can renew...
 Reader, the elder sister now
 forgot. Its trodden path is now
 Shishkov,6 forgive me: I don't know
 and in the morning wouldn't know
 but she (for women, that's not new)
 has painted for us the first snow
 Maidservants on the beds just now
 I only write like this, you know,
 along the street lies dirty snow;
 to us, though, not exactly new.
 bear, blackness, blizzard, bridge and crow,
 that, like proud Byron, I can draw
 her clever husband on the morrow
 thank you indeed. Alike in sorrow
 My soul's like crystal, and tomorrow
 ``As for the other one... tomorrow
 The better to dispel her sorrow
 Tanya to all her kin. My sorrow
 having decyphered on their brow
 lest signs of casual weakness drew
 how to engage in talk that drew
 twin lamps of serried coup&eacute;s throw
 I've run a mile, I must avow,
 X
 that wicked, loose-tongue chatterbox...
 X
 long life to our dear friend, Bordeaux!
 beyond a string of dull tableaux,
 X
 IX
 IX
 XX
 XX
 IX
 XX
 XX
 XX
 XX
 XX
 LIX
 XLIX
 XLIX
 XLIX
 XIX
 XIX
 XIX
 XIX
 XIX
 XXX
 XIX
 XIX
 XXX
 XXIX
 XXIX
 XXIX
 XXIX
 (VIII,2 IX,) X
 XXXIX
 (XXXVIII) XXXIX
 of that old duellistic fox,
 X
 X
 X
 LX
 IX
 1 ``See First Snow, a poem by Prince Vyazemsky.'' Pushkin's note. For Prince P. Vyazemsky (1791--1878), poet, critic and close friend of Pushkin, see also Chapter Seven, XLIX.
 XXX
 XXX
 XXX
 XXX
 XXX
 XXIX
 XXIX
 XXIX
 XXXIX
 XXXIX
 XXXIX
 (XXXVIII,2) XXXIX
 without a goal on which to fix,
 IX
 Chapter Six
 Notes to Chapter Six
 IX
 XX
 XLIX
 XXX
 XIX
 XXIX
 (IX,2) X
 lived to the age of twenty-six;
 He smiled as Lensky talked: the heady
 Your horse, blunt-shoed and all unwary,
 Why, pretty one, you're up already!
 along Tverskaya Street already
 and he believed his friends were ready
 are almost bursting; she's quite ready,
 spends light and darkness in the dreary
 on features known, but to that dreary,
 addressed to Onegin''... ...'Well, that's easy.
 (critical judges, strict as any)
 but now, thank God, you're well and steady,
 to put on chains for him, and steady
 prevailed, and with composure steady
 the potholes make the coach unsteady.
 his mind, in judgement still unsteady,
 Why have you gone all pale and queasy?''
 across to her consort a weary
 bored with hilarity, and weary,
 Onegin was assessed by many
 is deep in love, just like a boy;
 They take her too to the Assembly.
 the blaze of candles, and the trembly
 or on the granite of the bay.
 reluctant to exhaust the boy,
 We each enjoy a special hobby,
 ``he dandled me as a small boy.
 each of us has his favourite lobby:
 lately he married off his boy.''
 The two old ladies kiss and cry;
 in unison repeat the cry:
 but Tanya found she couldn't cry:
 I'd love you, but inside a day,
 all egoistical and dry,
 sickroom attendance night and day
 until the tombstone; there one day
 and dreamt that she with him one day
 What breasts! What soul!... We'll go one day
 tomorrow just like yesterday.
 Onegin, d'you recall the day
 he looks, and sees the hour of day --
 in flowers of spring it's drinking dry:
 and then, indoors the livelong day,
 and in my soul, o spring, how madly
 in dark attire the new-born day.
 and no one in the room so proudly
 girls as they passed her spoke less loudly,
 the same as any other day.
 he was a poet in his day.
 I'd still like dances to this day:
 praised his fierce courage in its day:
 Then, plunged in the housekeeper's day,
 O spring! o time for love! how sadly
 with old Anisia. The next day
 was undiscovered to that day.
 how are your kith and kin today?
 Yet the mazurka keeps today
 seared as by fire, she stopped. Today
 then liking grew, then every day
 to fresh grandparents every day.
 9 Actress in tragedy.
 for in our time, beyond dubiety,
 But, did they not corrupt society,
 Capricious belles of grand Society!
 5 Satiric poem by Ivan Dimitriev, 1795. The reference is - summarizing very briefly - to a controversy between different literary cliques about the relative merits of the classic ode and the romantic elegy.
 Days when I came to flower serenely
 is the supreme reward. Precisely,
 pronouncing through her nose politely
 that languid beauty, listens nicely --
 the expanse of fields, so wide, so lonely,
 Today... the sad memorial's lonely,
 Alas, Eugene beyond all query
 How long he'd been here, was her query,
 Alas, on pleasure's wild variety
 in order daily, chez V&eacute;ry,1
 or, sweeter, like a butterfly
 another's grin was sly and shifty,
 to captivate, and then to fly.
 ``My goodness, how the years do fly!''
 But, in a fearful huff, his thrifty
 as pair by pair the dancers fly.
 thickly the exclamations fly.
 the giddiest hope, carefree and gay,
 two hearts, a torch, and a nosegay;
 always monotonously gay,
 ask Tanya out to dine, and they
 of children, though as young as they,
 they met on horseback; quickly they
 of old-lime hospitality.
 drive there, and with formality
 But then, oblivious of the city,
 in far Moldavia, fit for pity,
 on Christmas Eve, he wished me joy:
 treated his lessons as a ploy.
 Amidst the hills, down in that valley,
 across green meadows, dilly-dally,
 or mother; and in all the play
 who'd sit, and at the end of play
 to see life as a ritual play,
 before it was the golden play
 he goes ahead and parts the motley
 watch the games we maidens play.''
 struck for Evgeny, with its play
 alarmed by my melodious lay,
 brooding that is the lover's ploy.
 have your fill of revelry!
 Tatyana's love is no by-play,
 14 Pushkin leaves blank the name of Onegin's model dandy.
 and read my Apuleius keenly,
 ``You don't see what to do? that's funny:
 ``My dear good sir, I'm short of money.''
 It all seemed new - for two days only --
 grey-haired and weak, beneath it only
 before him roast beef, red and gory,
 fortune, and dignity, and glory,
 ``as sung of old, in years of glory,
 and leave no faint footprint of glory...
 there Didelot10 crowned himself with glory:
 and p&acirc;t&eacute;, Strasbourg's deathless glory,
 ``To me, Onegin, all this glory
 I meant to paint, with Alban's8 glory,
 once more Corneille's majestic story;
 at fifty, would prolong the story
 to high renown my doleful story,
 this modish whirl, this social story,
 Only the ode, that solemn story!
 stiffening as the hours go by,
 Onegin's life, you see, was holy;
 Right at the outset of my story
 But onward, onward with my story!
 Onegin still is slumbering deeply.
 By now the sun is climbing steeply,
 though what's romantic here I simply
 to sing of others must imply
 So Lensky wrote, obscurely, limply
 will give you a complete reply.
 demanding: when will he reply?
 who swaggers in with the reply.
 do with her when a flat reply
 it needs no gold if a supply
 when little notes come on a tray.
 Blest he who's left the hurly-burly
 All Lensky's thoughts went hurly-burly,
 He rings at once, and what a scurry!
 though I'll come back to him, yet clearly
 the guests are feasted, good and hearty,
 go off to sleep quite hale and hearty,
 But not today. Although I dearly
 Eugene had no wish to betray
 ``Last night, what made you fly so early?''
 of finishing its book, but early
 where shall he go, my rogue, my hearty?
 she can't; and in her panic hurry
 and while the star still flew, she'd hurry
 with gown and slippers; tearing hurry,
 where, in a cab, and furious hurry,
 is this - one sees from here the party:
 devote to whist an evening party,
 a ball here, there a children's party;
 That isn't our immediate worry:
 Now she's alarmed; in desperate worry
 with perturbation and with worry;
 never come and like a spy
 to reasoned talk, no dull hearsay,
 Prince Vyazemsky
 (in the romantic style, we say,
 the cold perfection of the sky,
 to boom, to flash across the sky,
 ``It's nothing, nurse, nothing, I say...
 at my famed portrait and will say:
 Onegin had no word to say;
 Lensky had a curt word to say
 I lack the strength required to say
 for your enlightenment to say
 Zhukovsky
 No word: another day goes by.
 like mindless youth, the waltz goes by
 like a sweet child. She'll never say:
 visit the family, what d'you say?
 forgotten features. ``Can you say,
 Baratynsky
 and there, beneath your noonday sky,
 But you're not sociable, they say:
 in others' houses she may say
 How many times I made a toy
 Yes, spleen was waiting like a sentry,
 She's fallen in the snow - alertly
 dowagers smiled as she went by;
 and she, submissively, inertly --
 boredom has just as sure an entry,
 with a quick look perusing lightly
 will halt her horse and, gripping tightly
 lacing her stays up very tightly;
 and bliss for him is when he hotly
 The fire was dying; cinders faintly
 tumbled and whirled and twisted quaintly
 explodes; wine fizzes up... but stay:
 You'd never class her as a beauty;
 what London calls, with humble duty
 Take Olga's shoulders now - the beauty!
 and look serenely on your beauty!...
 I've known too many a haughty beauty,
 to dreaming given up unduly,
 inexorably wed to duty,
 and, as the years went by, who duly
 All flourishing; they send their duty.
 meanwhile with a dissembler's duty
 is represented rather truly,
 So she was called Tatyana. Truly
 Blest he who in his youth was truly
 1 Pushkin first wrote ``imperial portraits''; but this he later altered ``for reasons of censorship'' because, as Nabokov explains, ``tsars were not to be mentioned in so offhand a way''.
 for witty; in his Gallic way
 and how a country lives, and why
 who late at night are whirled away
 past ice-blocks, blue and squared away,
 wanders in a distracted way
 with custom, love would fade away;
 invention sparkled, then gave way
 jointly would tread life's humble way!
 Beneath storm's vestment, on the seaway,
 battling along that watery freeway,
 would say goodbye and drive away,
 I've wasted too much life away!
 a shambling hoof along the way;
 and then sat silent all the way.
 ``Farewell, you realms that own the sway
 fail to perceive - that's by the way).
 sequence of dinners stretch away,
 bright summer days that passed so slowly,
 his hours to dreaming them away:
 the rosy bloom that glowed so newly
 darlings, then we'll run away,
 her grief, and nearly ran away.
 pretty maidens, romp away,
 and held him briefly in their sway,
 looked on a river: far away
 to the empty homestead made her way,
 herself not knowing how or why)
 so a storm-shadow wraps away
 high time he should be on his way.
 just send your grandson on his way.''
 the grand barouche is on its way.
 even if he drops or pines away.
 with care Zaretsky stows away
 an ace a dozen yards away;
 ``Why did you visit us, but why?
 and never stir a foot away!
 though we... don't shine in any way,
 they leave their shores and fly away.




































 --------




























 ... ...





































































































 --------














































































 --------






































































































































































 --------
















































 ... ...



































































































































 --------






































































 --------
























































































































 ... ...


































 --------


































































































































































 Chapter One

 To live, it hurries, and to feel it hastes.
 Prince Vyazemsky

 I

 ``My uncle - high ideals inspire him;
 but when past joking he fell sick,
 he really forced one to admire him --
 and never played a shrewder trick.
 Let others learn from his example!
 But God, how deadly dull to sample
 sickroom attendance night and day
 and never stir a foot away!
 And the sly baseness, fit to throttle,
 of entertaining the half-dead:
 one smoothes the pillows down in bed,
 and glumly serves the medicine bottle,
 and sighs, and asks oneself all through:
 "When will the devil come for you?"''


 II

 Such were a young rake's meditations --
 by will of Zeus, the high and just,
 the legatee of his relations --
 as horses whirled him through the dust.
 Friends of my Ruslan and Lyudmila,
 without preliminary feeler
 let me acquaint you on the nail
 with this the hero of my tale:
 Onegin, my good friend, was littered
 and bred upon the Neva's brink,
 where you were born as well, I think,
 reader, or where you've shone and glittered!
 There once I too strolled back and forth:
 but I'm allergic to the North...1

 III

 After a fine career, his father
 had only debts on which to live.
 He gave three balls a year, and rather
 promptly had nothing left to give.
 Fate saved Evgeny from perdition:
 at first Madame gave him tuition,
 from her Monsieur took on the child.
 He was sweet-natured, and yet wild.
 Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;, the mediocre,
 reluctant to exhaust the boy,
 treated his lessons as a ploy.
 No moralizing from this joker;
 a mild rebuke was his worst mark,
 and then a stroll in Letny Park.


 IV

 But when the hour of youthful passion
 struck for Evgeny, with its play
 of hope and gloom, romantic-fashion,
 it was goodbye, Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;.
 Eugene was free, and as a dresser
 made London's dandy his professor.
 His hair was fashionably curled,
 and now at last he saw the World.
 In French Onegin had perfected
 proficiency to speak and write,
 in the mazurka he was light,
 his bow was wholly unaffected.
 The World found this enough to treat
 Eugene as clever, and quite sweet.

 V

 We all meandered through our schooling
 haphazard; so, to God be thanks,
 it's easy, without too much fooling,
 to pass for cultured in our ranks.
 Onegin was assessed by many
 (critical judges, strict as any)
 as well-read, though of pedant cast.
 Unforced, as conversation passed,
 he had the talent of saluting
 felicitously every theme,
 of listening like a judge-supreme
 while serious topics were disputing,
 or, with an epigram-surprise,
 of kindling smiles in ladies' eyes.


 VI

 Now Latin's gone quite out of favour;
 yet, truthfully and not in chaff,
 Onegin knew enough to savour
 the meaning of an epigraph,
 make Juvenal his text, or better
 add vale when he signed a letter;
 stumblingly call to mind he did
 two verses of the Aeneid.
 He lacked the slightest predilection
 for raking up historic dust
 or stirring annalistic must;
 but groomed an anecdote-collection
 that stretched from Romulus in his prime
 across the years to our own time.

 VII

 He was without that dithyrambic
 frenzy which wrecks our lives for sound,
 and telling trochee from iambic
 was quite beyond his wit, we found.
 He cursed Theocritus and Homer,
 in Adam Smith was his diploma;
 our deep economist had got
 the gift of recognizing what
 a nation's wealth is, what augments it,
 and how a country lives, and why
 it needs no gold if a supply
 of simple product supplements it.
 His father failed to understand
 and took a mortgage on his land.


 VIII

 Evgeny's total store of knowledge
 I have no leisure to recall;
 where he was master of his college,
 the art he'd studied best of all,
 his young heyday's supreme employment,
 its work, its torture, its enjoyment,
 what occupied his chafing powers
 throughout the boredom of the hours --
 this was the science of that passion
 which Ovid sang, for which the bard,
 condemned to a lifetime of hard,
 ended his wild career of fashion
 deep in Moldavia the abhorred,
 far, far from Italy, his adored.

 (IX,2) X

 How early he'd learnt to dissemble,
 to hide a hope, to make a show
 of jealousy, to seem to tremble
 or pine, persuade of yes or no,
 and act the humble or imperious,
 the indifferent, or the deadly serious!
 In languid silence, or the flame
 of eloquence, and just the same
 in casual letters of confession --
 one thing inspired his breath, his heart,
 and self-oblivion was his art!
 How soft his glance, or at discretion
 how bold or bashful there, and here
 how brilliant with its instant tear!


 XI

 How well he donned new shapes and sizes --
 startling the ingenuous with a jest,
 frightening with all despair's disguises,
 amusing, flattering with the best,
 stalking the momentary weakness,
 with passion and with shrewd obliqueness
 swaying the artless, waiting on
 for unmeant kindness - how he shone!
 then he'd implore a declaration,
 and listen for the heart's first sound,
 pursue his love - and at one bound
 secure a secret assignation,
 then afterwards, alone, at ease,
 impart such lessons as you please!

 XII

 How early on he learnt to trouble
 the heart of the professional flirt!
 When out to burst a rival's bubble,
 how well he knew the way to hurt --
 what traps he'd set him, with what malice
 he'd pop the poison in his chalice!
 But you, blest husbands, to the end
 you kept your friendship with our friend:
 the subtle spouse was just as loyal --
 Faublas'3 disciple for an age --
 as was the old suspicious sage,
 and the majestic, antlered royal,
 always contented with his life,
 and with his dinner, and his wife.


 (XIII, XIV,) XV

 Some days he's still in bed, and drowses,
 when little notes come on a tray.
 What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
 have each asked him to a soir&eacute;e:
 a ball here, there a children's party;
 where shall he go, my rogue, my hearty?
 Which one comes first? It's just the same
 to do them all is easy game.
 Meanwhile, attired for morning strolling
 complete with broad-brimmed bolivar,
 Eugene attends the boulevard,
 and there at large he goes patrolling
 until Br&eacute;guet's unsleeping chime
 advises him of dinner-time.

 XVI

 He mounts the sledge, with daylight fading:
 ``Make way, make way,'' goes up the shout;
 his collar in its beaver braiding
 glitters with hoar-frost all about.
 He's flown to Talon's,4 calculating
 that there his friend Kav&eacute;rin's5 waiting;
 he arrives - the cork goes flying up,
 wine of the Comet6 fills the cup;
 before him roast beef, red and gory,
 and truffles, which have ever been
 youth's choice, the flower of French cuisine:
 and p&acirc;t&eacute;, Strasbourg's deathless glory,
 sits with Limburg's vivacious cheese
 and ananas, the gold of trees.


 XVII

 More wine, he calls, to drench the flaming
 fire of the cutlets' scalding fat,
 when Br&eacute;guet's chime is heard proclaiming
 the new ballet he should be at.
 He's off - this ruthless legislator
 for the footlights, this fickle traitor
 to all the most adored actrices,
 this denizen of the coulisses
 that world where every man's a critic
 who'll clap an entrechat, or scoff
 at Cleopatra, hiss her off,
 boo Phaedra out as paralytic,
 encore Mo&euml;na,7 - and rejoice
 to know the audience hears his voice.

 XVIII

 Enchanted land! There like a lampion
 that king of the satiric scene,
 Fonvizin8 sparkled, freedom's champion,
 and the derivative Knyazhn&iacute;n:8
 there zerov8 shared the unwilling
 tribute of tears, applause's shrilling,
 with young Semy&oacute;nova,9 and there
 our friend Kat&eacute;nin8 brought to bear
 once more Corneille's majestic story;
 there caustic Shakhovsk&oacute;y8 came in
 with comedies of swarm and din;
 there Didelot10 crowned himself with glory:
 there, where the coulisse entrance went,
 that's where my years of youth were spent.


 XIX

 My goddesses! Where are you banished?
 lend ears to my lugubrious tone:
 have other maidens, since you vanished,
 taken your place, though not your throne?
 your chorus, is it dead for ever?
 Russia's Terpsichore, shall never
 again I see your soulful flight?
 shall my sad gaze no more alight
 on features known, but to that dreary,
 that alien scene must I now turn
 my disillusioned glass, and yearn,
 bored with hilarity, and weary,
 and yawn in silence at the stage
 as I recall a bygone age?

 XX

 The house is packed out; scintillating,
 the boxes; boiling, pit and stalls;
 the gallery claps - it's bored with waiting --
 and up the rustling curtain crawls.
 Then with a half-ethereal splendour,
 bound where the magic bow will send her,
 Ist&oacute;mina,11 thronged all around
 by Naiads, one foot on the ground,
 twirls the other slowly as she pleases,
 then suddenly she's off, and there
 she's up and flying through the air
 like fluff before Aeolian breezes;
 she'll spin this way and that, and beat
 against each other swift, small feet.


 XXI

 Applause. Onegin enters - passes
 across the public's toes; he steers
 straight to his stall, then turns his glasses
 on unknown ladies in the tiers;
 he's viewed the boxes without passion,
 he's seen it all; with looks and fashion
 he's dreadfully dissatisfied;
 to gentlemen on every side
 he's bowed politely; his attention
 wanders in a distracted way
 across the stage; he yawns: ``Ballet --
 they all have richly earned a pension;''
 he turns away: ``I've had enough --
 now even Didelot's tedious stuff.''

 XXII

 Still tumbling, devil, snake and Cupid
 on stage are thumping without cease;
 Still in the porch, exhausted-stupid,
 the footmen sleep on the pelisses;
 the audience still is busy stamping,
 still coughing, hissing, clapping, champing;
 still everywhere the lamps are bright;
 outside and in they star the night;
 still shivering in the bitter weather
 the horses fidget worse and worse;
 the coachmen ring the fire, and curse
 their lords, and thwack their palms together;
 but Eugene's out from din and press:
 by now he's driving home to dress.


 XXIII

 Shall I depict with expert knowledge
 the cabinet behind the door
 where the prize-boy of fashion's college
 is dressed, undressed, and dressed once more?
 Whatever for caprice of spending
 ingenious London has been sending
 across the Baltic in exchange
 for wood and tallow; all the range
 of useful objects that the curious
 Parisian taste invents for one --
 for friends of languor, or of fun,
 or for the modishly luxurious --
 all this, at eighteen years of age,
 adorned the sanctum of our sage.

 XXIV

 Porcelain and bronzes on the table,
 with amber pipes from Tsaregrad;12
 such crystalled scents as best are able
 to drive the swooning senses mad;
 with combs, and steel utensils serving
 as files, and scissors straight and curving,
 brushes on thirty different scales;
 brushes for teeth, brushes for nails.
 Rousseau (forgive a short distraction)
 could not conceive how solemn Grimm13
 dared clean his nails in front of him,
 the brilliant crackpot: this reaction
 shows freedom's advocate, that strong
 champion of rights, as in the wrong.


 XXV

 A man who's active and incisive
 can yet keep nail-care much in mind:
 why fight what's known to be decisive?
 custom is despot of mankind.
 Dressed like - --,14 duly dreading
 the barbs that envy's always spreading,
 Eugene's a pedant in his dress,
 in fact a thorough fop, no less.
 Three whole hours, at the least accounting,
 he'll spend before the looking-glass,
 then from his cabinet he'll pass
 giddy as Venus when she's mounting
 a masculine disguise to aid
 her progress at the masquerade.

 XXVI

 Your curiosity is burning
 to hear what latest modes require,
 and so, before the world of learning,
 I could describe here his attire;
 and though to do so would be daring,
 it's my profession; he was wearing --
 but pantaloons, waistcoat, and frock,
 these words are not of Russian stock:
 I know (and seek your exculpation)
 that even so my wretched style
 already tends too much to smile
 on words of foreign derivation,
 though years ago I used to look
 at the Academic Diction-book.


 XXVII

 That isn't our immediate worry:
 we'd better hasten to the ball,
 where, in a cab, and furious hurry,
 Onegin has outrun us all.
 Along the fronts of darkened houses,
 along the street where slumber drowses,
 twin lamps of serried coup&eacute;s throw
 a cheerful glimmer on the snow
 and radiate a rainbow: blazing
 with lampions studded all about
 the sumptuous palais shines out;
 shadows that flit behind the glazing
 project in silhouette the tops
 of ladies and of freakish fops.

 XXVIII

 Up to the porch our hero's driven:
 in, past concierge, up marble stair
 flown like an arrow, then he's given
 a deft arrangement to his hair,
 and entered. Ballroom overflowing...
 and band already tired of blowing,
 while a mazurka holds the crowd;
 and everything is cramped and loud;
 spurs of Chevalier Gardes are clinking,
 dear ladies' feet fly past like hail,
 and on their captivating trail
 incendiary looks are slinking,
 while roar of violins contrives
 to drown the hiss of modish wives.


 XXIX

 In days of carefree aspirations,
 the ballroom drove me off my head:
 the safest place for declarations,
 and where most surely notes are sped.
 You husbands, deeply I respect you!
 I'm at your service to protect you;
 now pay attention, I beseech,
 and take due warning from my speech.
 You too, mamas, I pray attend it,
 and watch your daughters closer yet,
 yes, focus on them your lorgnette,
 or else... or else, may God forfend it!
 I only write like this, you know,
 since I stopped sinning years ago.

 XXX

 Alas, on pleasure's wild variety
 I've wasted too much life away!
 But, did they not corrupt society,
 I'd still like dances to this day:
 the atmosphere of youth and madness,
 the crush, the glitter and the gladness,
 the ladies' calculated dress;
 I love their feet - though I confess
 that all of Russia can't contribute
 three pairs of handsome ones - yet there
 exists for me one special pair!
 one pair! I pay them memory's tribute
 though cold I am and sad; in sleep
 the heartache that they bring lies deep.


 XXXI

 Oh, when, and to what desert banished,
 madman, can you forget their print?
 my little feet, where have you vanished,
 what flowers of spring display your dint?
 Nursed in the orient's languid weakness,
 across our snows of northern bleakness
 you left no steps that could be tracked:
 you loved the opulent contact
 of rugs, and carpets' rich refinement.
 Was it for you that I became
 long since unstirred by praise and fame
 and fatherland and grim confinement?
 The happiness of youth is dead,
 just like, on turf, your fleeting tread.

 XXXII

 Diana's breast, the cheeks of Flora,
 all these are charming! but to put
 it frankly, I'm a firm adorer
 of the Terpsichorean foot.
 It fascinates by its assurance
 of recompense beyond endurance,
 and fastens, like a term of art,
 the wilful fancies of the heart.
 My love for it is just as tender,
 under the table's linen shield,
 on springtime grasses of the field,
 in winter, on the cast-iron fender,
 on ballroom's looking-glass parquet
 or on the granite of the bay.


 XXXIII

 On the seashore, with storm impending,
 how envious was I of the waves
 each in tumultuous turn descending
 to lie down at her feet like slaves!
 I longed, like every breaker hissing,
 to smother her dear feet with kissing.
 No, never in the hottest fire
 of boiling youth did I desire
 with any torture so exquisite
 to kiss Armida's lips, or seek
 the flaming roses of a cheek,
 or languid bosoms; and no visit
 of raging passion's surge and roll
 ever so roughly rocked my soul!

 XXXIV

 Another page of recollection:
 sometimes, in reverie's sacred land,
 I grasp a stirrup with affection,
 I feel a small foot in my hand;
 fancies once more are hotly bubbling,
 once more that touch is fiercely troubling
 the blood within my withered heart,
 once more the love, once more the smart...
 But, now I've praised the queens of fashion,
 enough of my loquacious lyre:
 they don't deserve what they inspire
 in terms of poetry or passion --
 their looks and language in deceit
 are just as nimble as their feet.


 XXXV

 And Eugene? half-awake, half-drowsing,
 from ball to bed behold him come;
 while Petersburg's already rousing,
 untirable, at sound of drum:
 the merchant's up, the cabman's walking
 towards his stall, the pedlar's hawking;
 see with their jugs the milk-girls go
 and crisply crunch the morning snow.
 The city's early sounds awake her;
 shutters are opened and the soft
 blue smoke of chimneys goes aloft,
 and more than once the German baker,
 punctilious in his cotton cap,
 has opened up his serving-trap.

 XXXVI

 Exhausted by the ballroom's clamour,
 converting morning to midnight,
 he sleeps, away from glare and glamour,
 this child of luxury and delight.
 Then, after midday he'll be waking;
 his life till dawn's already making,
 always monotonously gay,
 tomorrow just like yesterday.
 But was it happy, his employment,
 his freedom, in his youth's first flower,
 with brilliant conquests by the shower,
 and every day its own enjoyment?
 Was it to no effect that he,
 at feasts, was strong and fancy-free?


 XXXVII

 No, early on his heart was cooling
 and he was bored with social noise;
 no, not for long were belles the ruling
 objective of his thoughts and joys:
 soon, infidelity proved cloying,
 and friends and friendship, soul-destroying;
 not every day could he wash down
 his beefsteak with champagne, or drown
 his Strasbourg pie, or point a moral,
 full of his usual pith and wit,
 with cranium aching fit to split;
 and though he liked a fiery quarrel --
 yet he fell out of love at last
 with sabre's slash, and bullet's blast.

 XXXVIII

 The illness with which he'd been smitten
 should have been analysed when caught,
 something like spleen, that scourge of Britain,
 or Russia's chondria, for short;
 it mastered him in slow gradation;
 thank God, he had no inclination
 to blow his brains out, but in stead
 to life grew colder than the dead.
 So, like Childe Harold, glum, unpleasing,
 he stalked the drawing-rooms, remote
 from Boston's cloth or gossip's quote;
 no glance so sweet, no sigh so teasing,
 no, nothing caused his heart to stir,
 and nothing pierced his senses' blur.


 (XXXIX, XL, XLI,) XLII

 Capricious belles of grand Society!
 you were the first ones he forswore;
 for in our time, beyond dubiety,
 the highest circles are a bore.
 It's true, I'll not misrepresent them,
 some ladies preach from Say and Bentham,
 but by and large their talk's a hash
 of the most harmless, hopeless trash.
 And what's more, they're so supercilious,
 so pure, so spotless through and through,
 so pious, and so clever too,
 so circumspect, and so punctilious,
 so virtuous that, no sooner seen,
 at once they give a man the spleen.

 XLIII

 You too, prime beauties in your flower
 who late at night are whirled away
 by drozhkies jaunting at full power
 over the Petersburg pav&eacute; --
 he ended even your employment;
 and in retreat from all enjoyment
 locked himself up inside his den
 and with a yawn took up his pen,
 and tried to write, but a hard session
 of work made him feel sick, and still
 no word came flowing from his quill;
 he failed to join that sharp profession
 which I myself won't praise or blame
 since I'm a member of the same.


 XLIV

 Idle again by dedication,
 oppressed by emptiness of soul,
 he strove to achieve the appropriation
 of other's thought - a splendid goal;
 with shelves of books deployed for action,
 he read, and read - no satisfaction:
 here's boredom, madness or pretence,
 here there's no conscience, here no sense;
 they're all chained up in different fetters,
 the ancients have gone stiff and cold,
 the moderns rage against the old.
 He'd given up girls - now gave up letters,
 and hid the bookshelf's dusty stack
 in taffeta of mourning black.

 XLV

 Escaped from social rhyme and reason,
 retired, as he, from fashion's stream,
 I was Onegin's friend that season.
 I liked his quality, the dream
 which held him silently subjected,
 his strangeness, wholly unaffected,
 his mind, so cold and so precise.
 The bitterness was mine - the ice
 was his; we'd both drunk passion's chalice:
 our lives were flat, and what had fired
 both hearts to blaze had now expired;
 there waited for us both the malice
 of blind Fortuna and of men
 in lives that were just dawning then.


 XLVI

 He who has lived and thought is certain
 to scorn the men with whom he deals;
 days that are lost behind the curtain,
 ghostlike, must trouble him who feels --
 for him all sham has found rejection,
 he's gnawed by serpent Recollection,
 and by Repentance. All this lends,
 on most occasions between friends,
 a great attraction to conversing.
 At first Onegin's tongue produced
 a haze in me, but I grew used
 to his disputing and his cursing;
 his virulence that made you smile,
 his epigrams topped up with bile.

 XLVII

 How often, when the sky was glowing,
 by Neva, on a summer night,
 and when its waters were not showing,
 in their gay glass, the borrowed light
 of Dian's visage, in our fancies
 recalling earlier time's romances,
 recalling earlier loves, did we,
 now sensitive, and now carefree,
 drink in the midnight benediction,
 the silence when our talk had ceased!
 Like convicts in a dream released
 from gaol to greenwood, by such fiction
 we were swept off, in reverie's haze,
 to the beginning of our days.


 XLVIII

 Evgeny stood, with soul regretful,
 and leant upon the granite shelf;
 he stood there, pensive and forgetful,
 just as the Poet15 paints himself.
 Silence was everywhere enthralling;
 just sentries to each other calling,
 and then a drozhky's clopping sound
 from Million Street16 came floating round;
 and then a boat, with oars a-swinging,
 swam on the river's dreaming face,
 and then, with an enchanting grace,
 came distant horns, and gallant singing.
 Yet sweeter far, at such a time,
 the strain of Tasso's octave-rhyme!

 XLIX

 O Adrian waves, my invocation;
 O Brenta, I'll see you in dream;
 hear, once more filled with inspiration,
 the magic voices of your stream,
 sacred to children of Apollo!
 Proud Albion's lyre is what I follow,
 through it they're known to me, and kin.
 Italian nights, when I'll drink in
 your molten gold, your charmed infusion;
 with a Venetian maiden who
 can chatter, and be silent too,
 I'll float in gondola's seclusion;
 from her my lips will learn and mark
 the tongue of love and of Petrarch.


 L

 When comes my moment to untether?
 ``it's time!'' and freedom hears my hail.
 I walk the shore,17 I watch the weather,
 I signal to each passing sail.
 Beneath storm's vestment, on the seaway,
 battling along that watery freeway,
 when shall I start on my escape?
 It's time to drop astern the shape
 of the dull shores of my disfavour,
 and there, beneath your noonday sky,
 my Africa,18 where waves break high,
 to mourn for Russia's gloomy savour,
 land where I learned to love and weep,
 land where my heart is buried deep.

 LI

 Eugene would willingly have started
 with me to see an alien strand;
 but soon the ways we trod were parted
 for quite a while by fortune's hand.
 His father died; and (as expected)
 before Onegin there collected
 the usurers' voracious tribe.
 To private tastes we each subscribe:
 Evgeny, hating litigation,
 and satisfied with what he'd got,
 made over to them his whole lot,
 finding in that no deprivation --
 or else, from far off, he could see
 old Uncle's end was soon to be.


 LII

 In fact one day a note came flying
 from the agent, with this tale to tell:
 Uncle, in bed, and near to dying,
 wished him to come and say farewell.
 Evgeny read the sad epistle
 and set off prompter than a whistle
 as fast as post-horses could go,
 already yawned before the show,
 exercised, under lucre's banner,
 in sighs and boredom and deceits
 (my tale's beginning here repeats);
 but, when he'd rushed to Uncle's manor,
 a corpse on boards was all he found,
 an offering ready for the ground.

 LIII

 The yard was bursting with dependants;
 there gathered at the coffin-side
 friends, foes, priests, guests, inured attendants
 of every funeral far and wide;
 they buried Uncle, congregated
 to eat and drink, then separated
 with grave goodbyes to the bereaved,
 as if some goal had been achieved.
 Eugene turned countryman. He tasted
 the total ownership of woods,
 mills, lands and waters - he whose goods
 till then had been dispersed and wasted --
 and glad he was he'd thus arranged
 for his old courses to be changed.


 LIV

 It all seemed new - for two days only --
 the coolness of the sombre glade,
 the expanse of fields, so wide, so lonely,
 the murmur where the streamlet played...
 the third day, wood and hill and grazing
 gripped him no more; soon they were raising
 an urge to sleep; soon, clear as clear,
 he saw that, as in cities, here
 boredom has just as sure an entry,
 although there are no streets, no cards,
 no mansions, no ballrooms, no bards.
 Yes, spleen was waiting like a sentry,
 and dutifully shared his life
 just like a shadow, or a wife.

 LV

 No, I was born for peace abounding
 and country stillness: there the lyre
 has voices that are more resounding,
 poetic dreams, a brighter fire.
 To harmless idleness devoted,
 on waves of far niente floated,
 I roam by the secluded lake.
 And every morning I awake
 to freedom, softness and enjoyment:
 sleep much, read little, and put down
 the thought of volatile renown.
 Was it not in such sweet employment
 such shadowy and leisured ways,
 that once I spent my happiest days?


 LVI

 O flowers, and love, and rustic leisure,
 o fields - to you I'm vowed at heart.
 I regularly take much pleasure
 in showing how to tell apart
 myself and Eugene, lest a reader
 of mocking turn, or else a breeder
 of calculated slander should,
 spying my features, as he could,
 put back the libel on the table
 that, like proud Byron, I can draw
 self-portraits only - furthermore
 the charge that poets are unable
 to sing of others must imply
 the poet's only theme is ``I.''

 LVII

 Poets, I'll say in this connection,
 adore the love that comes in dream.
 In time past, objects of affection
 peopled my sleep, and to their theme
 my soul in secret gave survival;
 then from the Muse there came revival:
 my carefree song would thus reveal
 the mountain maiden,19 my ideal,
 and captive girls, by Salgir20 lying.
 And now, my friends, I hear from you
 a frequent question: ``tell me who
 inspires your lute to sounds of sighing?
 To whom do you, from all the train
 of jealous girls, devote its strain?


 LVIII

 ``Whose glance, provoking inspiration,
 rewards the music of your mind
 with fond caress? whose adoration
 is in your poetry enshrined?''
 No one's, I swear by God! in sadness
 I suffered once from all the madness
 of love's anxiety. Blessed is he
 who can combine it with the free
 fever of rhyme: thereby he's doubled
 poetry's sacred frenzy, made
 a stride on Petrarch's path, allayed
 the pangs with which his heart was troubled,
 and, with it, forced renown to come --
 but I, in love, was dull and dumb.

 LIX

 Love passed, the Muse appeared, the weather
 of mind got clarity new-found;
 now free, I once more weave together
 emotion, thought, and magic sound;
 I write, my heart has ceased its pining,
 my thoughtless pen has stopped designing,
 beside unfinished lines, a suite
 of ladies' heads, and ladies' feet;
 dead ash sets no more sparks a-flying;
 I'm grieving still, but no more tears,
 and soon, oh soon the storm's arrears
 will in my soul be hushed and dying.
 That's when I'll sit down to compose
 an ode in twenty-five cantos.


 LX

 I've drawn a plan and a projection,
 the hero's name's decided too.
 Meanwhile my novel's opening section
 is finished, and I've looked it through
 meticulously; in my fiction
 there's far too much of contradiction,
 but I refuse to chop or change.
 The censor's tribute, I'll arrange:
 I'll feed the journalists for dinner
 fruits of my labour and my ink...
 So now be off to Neva's brink,
 you newborn work, and like a winner
 earn for me the rewards of fame --
 misunderstanding, noise, and blame!


 Notes to Chapter One

 1 ``Written in Bessarabia.'' Pushkin's note.
 2 Stanzas IX, XIII, XIV, XXXIX, XL and XLI were omitted by Pushkin.
 3 Hero of Louvet's novel about betrayed husbands.
 4 ``Well-known restaurateur.'' Pushkin's note.
 5 Hussar and friend of Pushkin.
 6 Vintage 1811, the year of the Comet.
 7 Heroine of Ozerov's tragedy Fingal.
 8 Playwrights of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
 9 Actress in tragedy.
 10 Dancer and choreographer.
 11 Ballerina, once courted by Pushkin.
 12 Constantinople.
 13 French encyclopedist.
 14 Pushkin leaves blank the name of Onegin's model dandy.
 15 A mocking reference to Mikhail Muraviev's poem ``To the Goddess of the Neva.''
 16 Millyonaya, a street parallel to the Neva, and one block away from it.
 17 ``Written at Odessa.'' Pushkin's note.
 18 ``The author, on his mother's side, is of African descent...'' Pushkin's note.
 19 Refers to the Circassian girl in Pushkin's poem The Caucasian Prisoner.
 20 River in the Crimea. The reference is to the harem girls in Pushkin's poem The Fountain of Bakhchisarai.
 --------
 Chapter Two

 O rus!
 Horace
 O Russia!

 I

 The place where Eugene loathed his leisure
 was an enchanting country nook:
 there any friend of harmless pleasure
 would bless the form his fortune took.
 The manor house, in deep seclusion,
 screened by a hill from storm's intrusion,
 looked on a river: far away
 before it was the golden play
 of light that flowering fields reflected:
 villages flickered far and near,
 and cattle roamed the plain, and here
 a park, enormous and neglected,
 spread out its shadow all around --
 the pensive Dryads' hiding-ground.


 II

 The ch&acirc;teau was of a construction
 befitting such a noble pile:
 it stood, defiant of destruction
 in sensible old-fashioned style.
 High ceilings everywhere abounded;
 in the saloon, brocade-surrounded,
 ancestral1 portraits met the view
 and stoves with tiles of various hue.
 All this has now gone out of fashion,
 I don't know why, but for my friend
 interior d&eacute;cor in the end
 excited not a hint of passion:
 a modish taste, a dowdy touch --
 both set him yawning just as much.

 III

 The rustic sage, in that apartment,
 forty years long would criticise
 his housekeeper and her department
 look through the pane, and squash the flies.
 Oak-floored, and simple as a stable:
 two cupboards, one divan, a table,
 no trace of ink, no spots, no stains.
 And of the cupboards, one contains
 a book of household calculations,
 the other, jugs of applejack,
 fruit liqueurs and an Almanack
 for 1808: his obligations
 had left the squire no time to look
 at any other sort of book.


 IV

 Alone amid all his possessions,
 to pass the time was Eugene's theme:
 it led him, in these early sessions,
 to institute a new regime.
 A thinker in a desert mission,
 he changed the corv&eacute;e of tradition
 into a small quit-rent - and got
 his serfs rejoicing at their lot.
 But, in a fearful huff, his thrifty
 neighbour was sure, from this would flow
 consequences of hideous woe;
 another's grin was sly and shifty,
 but all concurred that, truth to speak,
 he was a menace, and a freak.

 V

 At first they called; but on perceiving
 invariably, as time went on,
 that from the backdoor he'd be leaving
 on a fast stallion from the Don,
 once on the highway he'd detected
 the noise their rustic wheels projected --
 they took offence at this, and broke
 relations off, and never spoke.
 ``The man's a boor; his brain is missing,
 he's a freemason too; for him,
 red wine in tumblers to the brim --
 but ladies' hands are not for kissing;
 it's yes or no, but never sir.''
 The vote was passed without demur.


 VI

 Meanwhile another new landowner
 came driving to his country seat,
 and, in the district, this persona
 drew scrutiny no less complete --
 Vladimir Lensky, whose creator
 was G&ouml;ttingen, his alma mater,
 good-looking, in the flower of age,
 a poet, and a Kantian sage.
 He'd brought back all the fruits of learning
 from German realms of mist and steam,
 freedom's enthusiastic dream,
 a spirit strange, a spirit burning,
 an eloquence of fevered strength,
 and raven curls of shoulder-length.

 VII

 He was too young to have been blighted
 by the cold world's corrupt finesse;
 his soul still blossomed out, and lighted
 at a friend's word, a girl's caress.
 In heart's affairs, a sweet beginner,
 he fed on hope's deceptive dinner;
 the world's &eacute;clat, its thunder-roll,
 still captivated his young soul.
 He sweetened up with fancy's icing
 the uncertainties within his heart;
 for him, the objective on life's chart
 was still mysterious and enticing --
 something to rack his brains about,
 suspecting wonders would come out.


 VIII

 He was convinced, a kindred creature
 would be allied to him by fate;
 that, meanwhile, pinched and glum of feature,
 from day to day she could but wait;
 and he believed his friends were ready
 to put on chains for him, and steady
 their hand to grapple slander's cup,
 in his defence, and smash it up;
 &lt; that there existed, for the indulgence
 of human friendship, holy men,
 immortals picked by fate for when,
 with irresistible refulgence,
 their breed would (some years after this)
 shine out and bring the world to bliss. &gt;2

 IX

 Compassion, yes, and indignation,
 honest devotion to the good,
 bitter-sweet glory's inspiration,
 already stirred him as they should.
 He roamed the world, his lyre behind him;
 Schiller and Goethe had refined him,
 and theirs was the poetic flame
 that fired his soul, to burn the same;
 the Muses' lofty arts and fashions,
 fortunate one, he'd not disgrace;
 but in his songs kept pride of place
 for the sublime, and for the passions
 of virgin fancy, and again
 the charm of what was grave and plain.


 X

 He sang of love, to love subjected,
 his song was limpid in its tune
 as infant sleep, or the unaffected
 thoughts of a girl, or as the moon
 through heaven's expanse serenely flying,
 that queen of secrets and of sighing.
 He sang of grief and parting-time,
 of something vague, some misty clime;
 roses romantically blowing;
 of many distant lands he sang
 where in the heart of silence rang
 his sobs, where his live tears were flowing;
 he sang of lifetime's yellowed page --
 when not quite eighteen years of age.

 XI

 But in that desert his attainments
 only to Eugene showed their worth;
 Lensky disliked the entertainments
 of neighbouring owners of the earth --
 he fled from their resounding chatter!
 Their talk, so sound on every matter,
 on liquor, and on hay brought in,
 on kennels, and on kith and kin,
 it had no sparkle of sensation,
 it lacked, of course, poetic heart,
 sharpness of wit, and social art,
 and logic; yet the conversation
 upon the side of the distaff --
 that was less clever still by half.


 XII

 Vladimir, wealthy and good-looking,
 was asked around as quite a catch --
 such is the usual country cooking;
 and all the neighbours planned a match
 between their girls and this half-Russian.
 As soon as he appears, discussion
 touches obliquely, but with speed,
 on the dull life that bachelors lead;
 and then it's tea that comes to mention,
 and Dunya works the samovar;
 and soon they bring her... a guitar
 and whisper ``Dunya, pay attention!''
 then, help me God, she caterwauls:
 ``Come to me in my golden halls.''

 XIII

 Lensky of course was quite untainted
 by any itch for marriage ties;
 instead the chance to get acquainted
 with Eugene proved a tempting prize.
 So, verse and prose, they came together.
 No ice and flame, no stormy weather
 and granite, were so far apart.
 At first, disparity of heart
 rendered them tedious to each other;
 then liking grew, then every day
 they met on horseback; quickly they
 became like brother knit to brother.
 Friendship, as I must own to you,
 blooms when there's nothing else to do.


 XIV

 But friendship, as between our heroes,
 can't really be: for we've outgrown
 old prejudice; all men are zeros,
 the units are ourselves alone.
 Napoleon's our sole inspiration;
 the millions of two-legged creation
 for us are instruments and tools;
 feeling is quaint, and fit for fools.
 More tolerant in his conception
 than most. Evgeny, though he knew
 and scorned his fellows through and through,
 yet, as each rule has its exception,
 people there were he glorified,
 feelings he valued - from outside.

 XV

 He smiled as Lensky talked: the heady
 perfervid language of the bard,
 his mind, in judgement still unsteady,
 and always the inspired regard --
 to Eugene all was new and thrilling;
 he struggled to bite back the chilling
 word on his lips, and thought: it's sheer
 folly for me to interfere
 with such a blissful, brief infection --
 even without me it will sink;
 but meanwhile let him live, and think
 the universe is all perfection;
 youth is a fever; we must spare
 its natural right to rave and flare.


 XVI

 Between them, every topic started
 reflection or provoked dispute:
 treaties of nations long departed,
 and good and ill, and learning's fruit,
 the prejudices of the ages,
 the secrets of the grave, the pages
 of fate, and life, each in its turn
 became their scrutiny's concern.
 In the white heat of some dissension
 the abstracted poet would bring forth
 fragments of poems from the North,
 which, listening with some condescension,
 the tolerant Evgeny heard --
 but scarcely understood a word.

 XVII

 But it was passion that preempted
 the thoughts of my two anchorites.
 From that rough spell at last exempted,
 Onegin spoke about its flights
 with sighs unconsciously regretful.
 Happy is he who's known its fretful
 empire, and fled it; happier still
 is he who's never felt its will,
 he who has cooled down love with parting,
 and hate with malice; he whose life
 is yawned away with friends and wife
 untouched by envy's bitter smarting,
 who on a deuce, that famous cheat,
 has never staked his family seat.


 XVIII

 When we've retreated to the banner
 of calm and reason, when the flame
 of passion's out, and its whole manner
 become a joke to us, its game,
 its wayward tricks, its violent surging,
 its echoes, its belated urging,
 reduced to sense, not without pain --
 we sometimes like to hear again
 passion's rough language talked by others,
 and feel once more emotion's ban.
 So a disabled soldier-man,
 retired, forgotten by his brothers,
 in his small shack, will listen well
 to tales that young moustachios tell.

 XIX

 But it's the talent for concealing
 that ardent youth entirely lacks;
 hate, love, joy, sorrow - every feeling,
 it blabs, and spills them in its tracks.
 As, lovingly, in his confession,
 the poet's heart found full expression,
 Eugene, with solemn face, paid heed,
 and felt himself love's invalide.
 Lensky ingenuously related
 his conscience's record, and so
 Onegin swiftly came to know
 his tale of youthful love, narrated
 with deep emotion through and through,
 to us, though, not exactly new.


 XX

 Ah, he had loved a love that never
 is known today; only a soul
 that raves with poetry can ever
 be doomed to feel it: there's one goal
 perpetually, one goal for dreaming,
 one customary object gleaming,
 one customary grief each hour!
 not separation's chilling power,
 no years of absence past returning,
 no beauties of a foreign clime,
 no noise of gaiety, no time
 devoted to the Muse, or learning,
 nothing could alter or could tire
 this soul that glowed with virgin fire.

 XXI

 Since earliest boyhood he had doted
 on Olga; from heart's ache still spared,
 with tenderness he'd watched and noted
 her girlhood games; in them he'd shared,
 by deep and shady woods protected;
 the crown of marriage was projected
 for them by fathers who, as friends
 and neighbours, followed the same ends.
 Away inside that unassuming
 homestead, before her parents' gaze,
 she blossomed in the graceful ways
 of innocence: a lily blooming
 in deepest grasses, quite alone,
 to bee and butterfly unknown.


 XXII

 And our young poet - Olga fired him
 in his first dream of passion's fruit,
 and thoughts of her were what inspired him
 to the first meanings of his flute.
 Farewell the games of golden childhood!
 he fell in love with darkest wildwood,
 solitude, stillness and the night,
 the stars, the moon - celestial light
 to which so oft we've dedicated
 those walks amid the gloom and calm
 of evening, and those tears, the balm
 of secret pain... but it's now rated
 by judgement of the modern camp
 almost as good as a dim lamp.

 XXIII

 Full of obedience and demureness,
 as gay as morning and as clear,
 poetic in her simple pureness,
 sweet as a lover's kiss, and dear,
 in Olga everything expresses --
 the skyblue eyes, the flaxen tresses,
 smile, voice and movements, little waist --
 take any novel, clearly traced
 you're sure to find her portrait in it:
 a portrait with a charming touch;
 once I too liked it very much;
 but now it bores me every minute.
 Reader, the elder sister now
 must be my theme, if you'll allow.


 XXIV

 Tatyana3 was her name... I own it,
 self-willed it may be just the same;
 but it's the first time you'll have known it,
 a novel graced with such a name.
 What of it? it's euphonious, pleasant,
 and yet inseparably present,
 I know it, in the thoughts of all
 are old times, and the servants' hall.
 We must confess that taste deserts us
 even in our names (and how much worse
 when we begin to talk of verse);
 culture, so far from healing, hurts us;
 what it's transported to our shore
 is mincing manners - nothing more.

 XXV

 So she was called Tatyana. Truly
 she lacked her sister's beauty, lacked
 the rosy bloom that glowed so newly
 to catch the eye and to attract.
 Shy as a savage, silent, tearful,
 wild as a forest deer, and fearful,
 Tatyana had a changeling look
 in her own home. She never took
 to kissing or caressing father
 or mother; and in all the play
 of children, though as young as they,
 she never joined, or skipped, but rather
 in silence all day she'd remain
 ensconced beside the window-pane.


 XXVI

 Reflection was her friend and pleasure
 right from the cradle of her days;
 it touched with reverie her leisure,
 adorning all its country ways.
 Her tender touch had never fingered
 the needle, never had she lingered
 to liven with a silk atour
 the linen stretched on the tambour.
 Sign of the urge for domination:
 in play with her obedient doll
 the child prepares for protocol --
 that corps of social legislation --
 and to it, with a grave import,
 repeats what her mama has taught.

 XXVII

 Tatyana had no dolls to dandle,
 not even in her earliest age;
 she'd never tell them news or scandal
 or novelties from fashion's page.
 Tatyana never knew the attraction
 of childish pranks: a chilled reaction
 to horror-stories told at night
 in winter was her heart's delight.
 Whenever nyanya had collected
 for Olga, on the spreading lawn,
 her little friends, Tatyana'd yawn,
 she'd never join the game selected,
 for she was bored by laughs and noise
 and by the sound of silly joys.


 XXVIII

 She loved the balcony, the session
 of waiting for the dawn to blush,
 when, in pale sky, the stars' procession
 fades from the view, and in the hush
 earth's rim grows light, and a forewarning
 whisper of breeze announces morning,
 and slowly day begins to climb.
 In winter, when for longer time
 the shades of night within their keeping
 hold half the world still unreleased,
 and when, by misty moon, the east
 is softly, indolently sleeping,
 wakened at the same hour of night
 Tatyana'd rise by candlelight.

 XXIX

 From early on she loved romances,
 they were her only food... and so
 she fell in love with all the fancies
 of Richardson and of Rousseau.
 Her father, kindly, well-regarded,
 but in an earlier age retarded,
 could see no harm in books; himself
 he never took one from the shelf,
 thought them a pointless peccadillo;
 and cared not what his daughter kept
 by way of secret tome that slept
 until the dawn beneath her pillow.
 His wife, just like Tatyana, had
 on Richardson gone raving mad.


 XXX

 And not because she'd read him, either,
 and not because she'd once preferred
 Lovelace, or Grandison, or neither;
 but in the old days she had heard
 about them - nineteen to the dozen --
 so often from her Moscow cousin
 Princess Alina. She was still
 engaged then - but against her will;
 loved someone else, not her intended,
 someone towards whose heart and mind
 her feelings were far more inclined --
 this Grandison of hers was splendid,
 a fop, a punter on the cards,
 and junior Ensign in the Guards.

 XXXI

 She was like him and always sported
 the latest fashions of the town;
 but, without asking, they transported
 her to the altar and the crown.
 The better to dispel her sorrow
 her clever husband on the morrow
 took her to his estate, where she,
 at first, with God knows whom to see,
 in tears and violent tossing vented
 her grief, and nearly ran away.
 Then, plunged in the housekeeper's day,
 she grew accustomed, and contented.
 In stead of happiness, say I,
 custom's bestowed us from on high.


 XXXII

 For it was custom that consoled her
 in grief that nothing else could mend;
 soon a great truth came to enfold her
 and give her comfort to the end:
 she found, in labours and in leisure,
 the secret of her husband's measure,
 and ruled him like an autocrat --
 so all went smoothly after that.
 Mushrooms in brine, for winter eating,
 fieldwork directed from the path,
 accounts, shaved forelocks,4 Sunday bath;
 meantime she'd give the maids a beating
 if her cross mood was at its worst --
 but never asked her husband first.

 XXXIII

 No, soon she changed her old demeanour:
 girls' albums, signed in blood for choice;
 Praskovya re-baptized ``Polina'';
 conversing in a singsong voice;
 lacing her stays up very tightly;
 pronouncing through her nose politely
 the Russian N, like N in French;
 soon all that went without a wrench:
 album and stays, Princess Alina,
 sentiment, notebook, verses, all
 she quite forgot - began to call
 ``Akulka'' the onetime Selina,
 and introduced, for the last lap,
 a quilted chamber-robe and cap.


 XXXIV

 Her loving spouse with approbation
 left her to follow her own line,
 trusted her without hesitation,
 and wore his dressing-gown to dine.
 His life went sailing in calm weather;
 sometimes the evening brought together
 neighbours and friends in kindly group,
 a plain, unceremonious troop,
 for grumbling, gossiping and swearing
 and for a chuckle or a smile.
 The evening passes, and meanwhile
 here's tea that Olga's been preparing;
 after that, supper's served, and so
 bed-time, and time for guests to go.

 XXXV

 Throughout their life, so calm, so peaceful,
 sweet old tradition was preserved:
 for them, in Butterweek5 the greaseful,
 Russian pancakes were always served;
 &lt; ...
 ... &gt;2
 they needed kvas like air; at table
 their guests, for all they ate and drank,
 were served in order of their rank.


 XXXVI

 And so they lived, two ageing mortals,
 till he at last was summoned down
 into the tomb's wide open portals,
 and once again received a crown.
 Just before dinner, from his labours
 he rested - wept for by his neighbours,
 his children and his faithful wife,
 far more than most who leave this life.
 He was a good and simple barin;6
 above the dust of his remains
 the funeral monument explains:
 ``A humble sinner, Dimitry Larin,
 beneath the stone reposes here,
 servant of God, and Brigadier.''

 XXXVII

 Lensky, restored to his manorial
 penates, came to cast an eye
 over his neighbour's plain memorial,
 and offer to that ash a sigh;
 sadly he mourned for the departed.
 ``Poor Yorick,'' said he, broken-hearted:
 ``he dandled me as a small boy.
 How many times I made a toy
 of his Och&aacute;kov7 decoration!
 He destined Olga's hand for me,
 kept asking: "shall I live to see"...''
 so, full of heart-felt tribulation,
 Lensky composed in autograph
 a madrigal for epitaph.


 XXXVIII

 There too, he honoured, hotly weeping,
 his parents' patriarchal dust
 with lines to mark where they were sleeping...
 Alas! the generations must,
 as fate's mysterious purpose burrows,
 reap a brief harvest on their furrows;
 they rise and ripen and fall dead:
 others will follow where they tread...
 and thus our race, so fluctuating,
 grows, surges, boils, for lack of room
 presses its forebears to the tomb.
 We too shall find our hour is waiting;
 it will be our descendants who
 out of this world will crowd us too.

 XXXIX

 So glut yourselves until you're sated
 on this unstable life, my friends!
 its nullity I've always hated,
 I know too surely how it ends.
 I'm blind to every apparition;
 and yet a distant admonition
 of hope sometimes disturbs my heart;
 it would be painful to depart
 and leave no faint footprint of glory...
 I never lived or wrote for praise;
 yet how I wish that I might raise
 to high renown my doleful story,
 that there be just one voice which came,
 like a true friend, to speak my name.


 XL

 And someone's heart will feel a quiver,
 for maybe fortune will have saved
 from drowning's death in Lethe river
 the strophe over which I slaved;
 perhaps - for flattering hope will linger --
 some future dunce will point a finger
 at my famed portrait and will say:
 he was a poet in his day.
 I thank him without reservation,
 the peaceful Muses' devotee,
 whose memory will preserve for me
 the fleeting works of my creation,
 whose kindly hand will ruffle down
 the laurel in the old man's crown!


 Notes to Chapter Two

 1 Pushkin first wrote ``imperial portraits''; but this he later altered ``for reasons of censorship'' because, as Nabokov explains, ``tsars were not to be mentioned in so offhand a way''.
 2 Lines discarded by Pushkin.
 3 ``Sweet-sounding Greek names like Agathon... etc., are only current in Russia among the common people.'' Pushkin's note.
 4 Serfs chosen as recruits for the army had their forelock cut off.
 5 The week before Lent.
 6 Gentleman, squire.
 7 Fortress captured from the Turks in 1788.
 --------
 Chapter Three

 Elle &eacute;tait fille, elle &eacute;tait amoureuse.
 Malfil&acirc;tre

 ``You're off? why, there's a poet for you!''
 ``Goodbye, Onegin, time I went.''
 ``Well, I won't hold you up or bore you;
 but where are all your evenings spent?''
 ``At the Larins'!'' ``But how mysterious.
 For goodness' sake, you can't be serious
 killing each evening off like that?''
 ``You're wrong.'' ``But what I wonder at
 is this - one sees from here the party:
 in first place - listen, am I right? --
 a simple Russian family night:
 the guests are feasted, good and hearty,
 on jam, and speeches in regard
 to rains, and flax, and the stockyard.''


 II

 ``I don't see what's so bad about it.''
 ``Boredom, that's what so bad, my friend.''
 ``Your modish world, I'll do without it;
 give me the homely hearth, and lend...''
 ``You pile one eclogue on another!
 for God's sake, that will do. But, brother,
 you're really going? Well, I'm sad.
 Now, Lensky, would it be so bad
 for me to glimpse this Phyllis ever
 with whom your thoughts are so obsessed --
 pen, tears, and rhymes, and all the rest?
 Present me, please.'' ``You're joking.'' ``Never.''
 ``Gladly.'' ``So when?'' ``Why not tonight?
 They will receive us with delight.''

 III

 ``Let's go.'' The friends, all haste and vigour,
 drive there, and with formality
 are treated to the fullest rigour
 of old-lime hospitality.
 The protocol is all one wishes:
 the jams appear in little dishes;
 on a small table's oilcloth sheen
 the jug of bilberry wine is seen.1


 IV

 And home was now their destination;
 as by the shortest way they flew,
 this was our heroes' conversation
 secretly overheard by you.
 ``You yawn, Onegin?'' ``As I'm used to.''
 ``This time I think you've been reduced to
 new depths of boredom.'' ``No, the same.
 The fields are dark, since evening came.
 Drive on, Andryushka! quicker, quicker!
 the country's pretty stupid here!
 oh, &agrave; propos: Larin's a dear
 simple old lady; but the liquor --
 I'm much afraid that bilberry wine
 won't benefit these guts of mine.''

 V

 ``But tell me, which one was Tatyana?''
 ``She was the one who looked as still
 and melancholy as Svetlana,2
 and sat down by the window-sill.''
 ``The one you love's the younger daughter?''
 ``Why not?'' ``I'd choose the other quarter
 if I, like you, had been a bard.
 Olga's no life in her regard:
 the roundest face that you've set eyes on,
 a pretty girl exactly like
 any Madonna by Van Dyck:
 a dumb moon, on a dumb horizon.''
 Lensky had a curt word to say
 and then sat silent all the way.


 VI

 Meanwhile the news of Eugene coming
 to the Larins' had caused a spout
 of gossip, and set comment humming
 among the neighbours round about.
 Conjecture found unending matter:
 there was a general furtive chatter,
 and jokes and spiteful gossip ran
 claiming Tatyana'd found her man;
 and some were even testifying
 the marriage plans were all exact
 but held up by the simple fact
 that modish rings were still a-buying.
 Of Lensky's fate they said no more --
 they'd settled that some years before.

 VII

 Tatyana listened with vexation
 to all this tattle, yet at heart
 in indescribable elation,
 despite herself, rehearsed the part:
 the thought sank in, and penetrated:
 she fell in love - the hour was fated...
 so fires of spring will bring to birth
 a seedling fallen in the earth.
 Her feelings in their weary session
 had long been wasting and enslaved
 by pain and languishment; she craved
 the fateful diet; by depression
 her heart had long been overrun:
 her soul was waiting... for someone.


 VIII

 Tatyana now need wait no longer.
 Her eyes were opened, and she said
 ``this is the one!'' Ah, ever stronger,
 in sultry sleep, in lonely bed,
 all day, all night, his presence fills her,
 by magic everything instils her
 with thoughts of him in ceaseless round.
 She hates a friendly voice's sound,
 or servants waiting on her pleasure.
 Sunk in dejection, she won't hear
 the talk of guests when they appear;
 she calls down curses on their leisure,
 and, when one's least prepared for it
 their tendency to call, and sit.

 IX

 Now, she devours, with what attention,
 delicious novels, laps them up;
 and all their ravishing invention
 with sheer enchantment fills her cup!
 These figures from the world of seeming,
 embodied by the power of dreaming,
 the lover of Julie Wolmar,3
 and Malek Adel,4 de Linar,5
 and Werther, martyred and doom-laden,
 and Grandison beyond compare,
 who sets me snoring then and there --
 all for our tender dreamy maiden
 are coloured in a single tone,
 all blend into Eugene alone.


 X

 Seeing herself as a creation --
 Clarissa, Julie, or Delphine6 --
 by writers of her admiration,
 Tatyana, lonely heroine,
 roamed the still forest like a ranger,
 sought in her book, that text of danger
 and found her dreams, her secret fire,
 the full fruit of her heart's desire;
 she sighed, and in a trance coopted
 another's joy, another's breast,
 whispered by heart a note addressed
 to the hero that she'd adopted.
 But ours, whatever he might be,
 ours was no Grandison - not he.

 XI

 Lending his tone a grave inflection,
 the ardent author of the past
 showed one a pattern of perfection
 in which his hero's mould was cast.
 He gave this figure - loved with passion,
 wronged always in disgraceful fashion --
 a soul of sympathy and grace,
 and brains, and an attractive face.
 Always our fervid hero tended
 pure passion's flame, and in a trice
 would launch into self-sacrifice;
 always before the volume ended
 due punishment was handed down
 to vice, while virtue got its crown.


 XII

 Today a mental fog enwraps us,
 each moral puts us in a doze,
 even in novels, vice entraps us,
 yes, even there its triumph grows.
 Now that the British Muse is able
 to wreck a maiden's sleep with fable,
 the idol that she'll most admire
 is either the distrait Vampire,
 Melmoth,7 whose roaming never ceases,
 Sbogar,8 mysterious through and through,
 the Corsair, or the Wandering Jew.
 Lord Byron, with his shrewd caprices,
 dressed up a desperate egoism
 to look like sad romanticism.

 XIII

 In this, dear reader, if you know it,
 show me the sense. Divine decree
 may wind up my career as poet;
 perhaps, though Phoebus warns, I'll see
 installed in me a different devil,
 and sink to prose's humble level:
 a novel on the established line
 may then amuse my glad decline.
 No secret crimes, and no perditions,
 shall make my story grim as hell;
 no, quite naively I'll retell
 a Russian family's old traditions;
 love's melting dreams shall fill my rhyme,
 and manners of an earlier time.


 XIV

 I'll catalogue each simple saying
 in father's or old uncle's book,
 and tell of children's plighted playing
 by ancient limes, or by a brook;
 and after jealousy's grim weather
 I'll part them, bring them back together;
 I'll make them spar another round,
 then to the altar, to be crowned.
 I'll conjure up that swooning fashion
 of ardent speech, that aching flow
 of language which, so long ago,
 facing a belle I loved with passion,
 my tongue kept drawing from the heart --
 but now I've rather lost the art.

 XV

 Tatyana dear, with you I'm weeping:
 for you have, at this early date,
 into a modish tyrant's keeping
 resigned disposal of your fate.
 Dear Tanya, you're condemned to perish;
 but first, the dreams that hope can cherish
 evoke for you a sombre bliss;
 you learn life's sweetness, and with this
 you drink the magic draught of yearning,
 that poison brew; and in your mind
 reverie hounds you, and you find
 shelter for trysts at every turning;
 in front of you, on every hand,
 you see your fated tempter stand.


 XVI

 Tatyana, hunted by love's anguish,
 has made the park her brooding-place,
 suddenly lowering eyes that languish,
 too faint to stir a further pace:
 her bosom heaves, her cheeks are staring
 scarlet with passion's instant flaring,
 upon her lips the breathing dies,
 noise in her ears, glare in her eyes...
 then night comes on; the moon's patrolling
 far-distant heaven's vaulted room;
 a nightingale, in forest gloom,
 sets a sonorous cadence rolling --
 Tatyana, sleepless in the dark,
 makes to her nurse low-voiced remark:

 XVII

 ``I can't sleep, nyanya: it's so stifling!
 open the window, sit down near.''
 ``Why, Tanya, what...?'' ``All's dull and trifling.
 The olden days, I want to hear...''
 ``What of them, Tanya? I was able,
 years back, to call up many a fable;
 I kept in mind an ancient store
 of tales of girls, and ghosts, and lore:
 but now my brain is darkened, Tanya:
 now I've forgotten all I knew.
 A sorry state of things, it's true!
 My mind is fuddled.'' ``Tell me, nyanya,
 your early life, unlock your tongue:
 were you in love when you were young?''


 XVIII

 ``What nonsense, Tanya! in those other
 ages we'd never heard of love:
 why, at the thought, my husband's mother
 had chased me to the world above.''
 ``How did you come to marry, nyanya?''
 ``I reckon, by God's will. My Vanya
 was younger still, but at that stage
 I was just thirteen years of age.
 Two weeks the matchmaker was plying
 to see my kin, and in the end
 my father blessed me. So I'd spend
 my hours in fear and bitter crying.
 Then, crying, they untwined my plait,
 and sang me to the altar-mat.

 XIX

 ``So to strange kinsfolk I was taken...
 but you're not paying any heed.''
 ``Oh nurse, I'm sad, I'm sad, I'm shaken,
 I'm sick, my dear, I'm sick indeed.
 I'm near to sobbing, near to weeping!...''
 ``You're ill, God have you in his keeping,
 the Lord have mercy on us all!
 whatever you may need, just call...
 I'll sprinkle you with holy water,
 you're all in fever... heavens above.''
 ``Nurse, I'm not ill; I... I'm in love.''
 ``The Lord God be with you, my daughter!''
 and, hands a-tremble, Nyanya prayed
 and put a cross-sign on the maid.


 XX

 ``I am in love,'' Tatyana's wailing
 whisper repeated to the crone.
 ``My dearest heart, you're sick and ailing.''
 ``I am in love; leave me alone.''
 And all the while the moon was shining
 and with its feeble glow outlining
 the girl's pale charms, her loosened hair,
 her drops of tears, and seated there,
 in quilted coat, where rays were gleaming
 on a small bench by Tanya's bed,
 the grey-haired nurse with kerchiefed head;
 and everything around was dreaming,
 in the deep stillness of the night,
 bathed in the moon's inspiring light.

 XXI

 Tatyana watched the moon, and floated
 through distant regions of the heart...
 A thought was born, and quickly noted...
 ``Go, nurse, and leave me here apart.
 Give me a pen and give me paper,
 bring up a table, and a taper;
 good night; I swear I'll lie down soon.''
 She was alone, lit by the moon.
 Elbow on table, spirit seething,
 still filled with Eugene, Tanya wrote,
 and in her unconsidered note
 all a pure maiden's love was breathing.
 She folds the page, lays down the plume.,
 Tatyana! it's addressed... to whom?


 XXII

 I've known too many a haughty beauty,
 cold, pure as ice, and as unkind,
 inexorably wed to duty,
 unfathomable to the mind;
 shocked by their modish pride, and fleeing
 the utter virtue of their being,
 I've run a mile, I must avow,
 having decyphered on their brow
 hell's terrifying imprecation:
 ``Abandon hope for evermore.''9
 Our love is what they most abhor;
 our terror is their consolation.
 Ladies of such a cast, I think,
 you too have seen on Neva's brink.

 XXIII

 Thronged by adorers, I've detected
 another, freakish one, who stays
 quite self-absorbed and unaffected
 by sighs of passion or by praise.
 To my astonishment I've seen her,
 having by her severe demeanour
 frightened to death a timid love,
 revive it with another shove --
 at least by a regretful kindness;
 at least her tone is sometimes found
 more tender than it used to sound.
 I've seen how, trustful in his blindness,
 the youthful lover once again
 runs after what is sweet, and vain.


 XXIV

 Why is Tatyana guiltier-seeming?
 is it that she, poor simple sweet,
 believes in her elected dreaming
 and has no knowledge of deceit?
 that, artless, and without concealing,
 her love obeys the laws of feeling,
 that she's so trustful, and imbued
 by heaven with such an unsubdued
 imagination, with such reason,
 such stubborn brain, and vivid will,
 and heart so tender, it can still
 burst to a fiery blaze in season?
 Such feckless passion - as I live,
 is this then what you can't forgive?

 XXV

 The flirt has reason's cool volition;
 Tatyana's love is no by-play,
 she yields to it without condition
 like a sweet child. She'll never say:
 ``By virtue of procrastinating
 we'll keep love's price appreciating,
 we'll draw it deeper in our net;
 first, we'll take vanity, and let
 hope sting it, then we'll try deploying
 doubts, to exhaust the heart, then fire
 jealousy's flame, to light desire;
 else, having found his pleasure cloying,
 the cunning prisoner can quite well
 at any hour escape his cell.''


 XXVI

 I see another problem looming:
 to save the honour of our land
 I must translate - there's no presuming --
 the letter from Tatyana's hand:
 her Russian was as thin as vapour,
 she never read a Russian paper,
 our native speech had never sprung
 unhesitating from her tongue,
 she wrote in French... what a confession!
 what can one do? as said above,
 until this day, a lady's love
 in Russian never found expression,
 till now our language - proud, God knows --
 has hardly mastered postal prose.

 XXVII

 They should be forced to read in Russian,
 I hear you say. But can you see
 a lady - what a grim discussion! --
 with The Well-Meaner10 on her knee?
 I ask you, each and every poet!
 the darling objects - don't you know it? --
 for whom, to expiate your crimes,
 you've made so many secret rhymes,
 to whom your hearts are dedicated,
 is it not true that Russian speech,
 so sketchily possessed by each,
 by all is sweetly mutilated,
 and it's the foreign phrase that trips
 like native idiom from their lips?


 XXVIII

 Protect me from such apparition
 on dance-floor, at breakup of ball,
 as bonneted Academician
 or seminarist in yellow shawl!
 To me, unsmiling lips bring terror,
 however scarlet; free from error
 of grammar, Russian language too.
 Now, to my cost it may be true
 that generations of new beauties,
 heeding the press, will make us look
 more closely at the grammar-book;
 that verse will turn to useful duties;
 on me, all this has no effect:
 tradition still keeps my respect.

 XXIX

 No, incorrect and careless chatter,
 words mispronounced, thoughts ill-expressed
 evoke emotion's pitter-patter,
 now as before, inside my breast;
 too weak to change, I'm staying vicious,
 I still find Gallicism delicious
 as youthful sinning, or the strains
 of Bogdan&oacute;vich's11 refrains.
 But that's enough. My beauty's letter
 must now employ my pen; somehow
 I gave my word, alas, though now
 a blank default would suit me better.
 I own it: tender Parny's12 rhyme
 is out of fashion in our time.


 XXX

 Bard13 of The Feasts, and heart's depression,
 if you'd still been with me, dear friend,
 I would have had the indiscretion
 to ask of you that you transcend
 in music's own bewitching fashion
 the foreign words a maiden's passion
 found for its utterance that night.
 Where are you? come - and my own right
 with an obeisance I'll hand over...
 But he, by sad and rocky ways,
 with heart that's grown unused to praise,
 on Finland's coast a lonely rover --
 he doesn't hear when I address
 his soul with murmurs of distress.

 XXXI

 Tatyana's letter, treasured ever
 as sacred, lies before me still.
 I read with secret pain, and never
 can read enough to get my fill.
 Who taught her an address so tender,
 such careless language of surrender?
 Who taught her all this mad, slapdash,
 heartfelt, imploring, touching trash
 fraught with enticement and disaster?
 It baffles me. But I'll repeat
 here a weak version, incomplete,
 pale transcript of a vivid master,
 or Freisch&uuml;tz as it might be played
 by nervous hands of a schoolmaid:


 Tatyana's Letter to Onegin

 ``I write to you - no more confession
 is needed, nothing's left to tell.
 I know it's now in your discretion
 with scorn to make my world a hell.

 ``But, if you've kept some faint impression
 of pity for my wretched state,
 you'll never leave me to my fate.
 At first I thought it out of season
 to speak; believe me: of my shame
 you'd not so much as know the name,
 if I'd possessed the slightest reason
 to hope that even once a week
 I might have seen you, heard you speak
 on visits to us, and in greeting
 I might have said a word, and then
 thought, day and night, and thought again
 about one thing, till our next meeting.
 But you're not sociable, they say:
 you find the country godforsaken;
 though we... don't shine in any way,
 our joy in you is warmly taken.

 ``Why did you visit us, but why?
 Lost in our backwoods habitation
 I'd not have known you, therefore I
 would have been spared this laceration.
 In time, who knows, the agitation
 of inexperience would have passed,
 I would have found a friend, another,
 and in the role of virtuous mother
 and faithful wife I'd have been cast.


 ``Another!... No, another never
 in all the world could take my heart!
 Decreed in highest court for ever...
 heaven's will - for you I'm set apart;
 and my whole life has been directed
 and pledged to you, and firmly planned:
 I know, Godsent one, I'm protected
 until the grave by your strong hand:
 you'd made appearance in my dreaming;
 unseen, already you were dear,
 my soul had heard your voice ring clear,
 stirred at your gaze, so strange, so gleaming,
 long, long ago... no, that could be
 no dream. You'd scarce arrived, I reckoned
 to know you, swooned, and in a second
 all in a blaze, I said: it's he!

 ``You know, it's true, how I attended,
 drank in your words when all was still --
 helping the poor, or while I mended
 with balm of prayer my torn and rended
 spirit that anguish had made ill.
 At this midnight of my condition,
 was it not you, dear apparition,
 who in the dark came flashing through
 and, on my bed-head gently leaning,
 with love and comfort in your meaning,
 spoke words of hope? But who are you:
 the guardian angel of tradition,
 or some vile agent of perdition
 sent to seduce? Resolve my doubt.
 Oh, this could all be false and vain,
 a sham that trustful souls work out;

 fate could be something else again..,

 ``So let it be! for you to keep
 I trust my fate to your direction,
 henceforth in front of you I weep,
 I weep, and pray for your protection..,
 Imagine it: quite on my own
 I've no one here who comprehends me,
 and now a swooning mind attends me,
 dumb I must perish, and alone.
 My heart awaits you: you can turn it
 to life and hope with just a glance --
 or else disturb my mournful trance
 with censure - I've done all to earn it!

 ``I close. I dread to read this page...
 for shame and fear my wits are sliding...
 and yet your honour is my gage
 and in it boldly I'm confiding''...


 XXXII

 Now Tanya's groaning, now she's sighing;
 the letter trembles in her grip;
 the rosy sealing-wafer's drying
 upon her feverish tongue; the slip
 from off her charming shoulder's drooping,
 and sideways her poor head is stooping.
 But now the radiance of the moon
 is dimmed. Down there the valley soon
 comes clearer through the mists of dawning.
 Down there, by slow degrees, the stream
 has taken on a silvery gleam;
 the herdsman's horn proclaimed the morning
 and roused the village long ago:
 to Tanya, all's an empty show.

 XXXIII

 She's paid the sunrise no attention,
 she sits with head sunk on her breast,
 over the note holds in suspension
 her seal with its engraven crest.
 Softly the door is opened, enter
 grey Filatevna, to present her
 with a small tray and a teacup.
 ``Get up, my child, it's time, get up!
 Why, pretty one, you're up already!
 My early bird! you know, last night
 you gave me such a shocking fright!
 but now, thank God, you're well and steady,
 your night of fretting's left no trace!
 fresh as a poppy-flower, your face.''


 XXXIV

 ``Oh nurse, a favour, a petition...''
 ``Command me, darling, as you choose.''
 ``Now don't suppose... let no suspicion...
 but, nurse, you see... Oh, don't refuse...''
 ``My sweet, God warrants me your debtor.''
 ``Then send your grandson with this letter
 quickly to O... I mean to that...
 the neighbour... you must tell the brat
 that not a syllable be uttered
 and not a mention of my name...''
 ``Which neighbour, dear? My head became
 in these last years all mixed and fluttered.
 We've many neighbours round about;
 even to count them throws me out.''

 XXXV

 ``How slow you are at guessing, nyanya!''
 ``My sweet, my dearest heart, I'm old,
 I'm old, my mind is blunted, Tanya;
 times were when I was sharp and bold:
 times were, when master's least suggestion...''
 ``Oh nyanya, nyanya, I don't question...
 what have your wits to do with me?
 Now here's a letter, as you see,
 addressed to Onegin''... ...'Well, that's easy.
 But don't be cross, my darling friend,
 you know I'm hard to comprehend...
 Why have you gone all pale and queasy?''
 ``It's nothing, nurse, nothing, I say...
 just send your grandson on his way.''


 XXXVI

 Hours pass; no answer; waiting, waiting.
 No word: another day goes by.
 She's dressed since dawn, dead pale; debating,
 demanding: when will he reply?
 Olga's adorer comes a-wooing.
 ``Tell me, what's your companion doing?''
 enquired the lady of the hall:
 ``it seems that he forgot us all.''
 Tatyana flushed, and started shaking.
 ``Today he promised he'd be here,''
 so Lensky answered the old dear:
 ``the mail explains the time he's taking.''
 Tatyana lowered her regard
 as at a censure that was hard.

 XXXVII

 Day faded; on the table, glowing,
 the samovar of evening boiled,
 and warmed the Chinese teapot; flowing
 beneath it, vapour wreathed and coiled.
 Already Olga's hand was gripping
 the urn of perfumed tea, and tipping
 into the cups its darkling stream --
 meanwhile a hallboy handed cream;
 before the window taking station,
 plunged in reflection's deepest train,
 Tatyana breathed on the cold pane,
 and in the misted condensation
 with charming forefinger she traced
 ``OE'' devotedly inlaced.


 XXXVIII

 Meanwhile with pain her soul was girdled,
 and tears were drowning her regard.
 A sudden clatter!... blood was curdled...
 Now nearer... hooves... and in the yard
 Evgeny! ``Ah!'' Tatyana, fleeting
 light as a shadow, shuns a meeting,
 through the back porch runs out and flies
 down to the garden, and her eyes
 daren't look behind her; fairly dashing --
 beds, bridges, lawn, she never stops,
 the all&eacute;e to the lake, the copse;
 breaking the lilac bushes, smashing
 parterres, she runs to rivulet's brink,
 to gasp, and on a bench to sink.

 XXXIX

 She dropped... ``It's he! Eugene arriving!
 Oh God, what did he think!'' A dream
 of hope is somehow still surviving
 in her torn heart - a fickle gleam;
 she trembles, and with fever drumming
 awaits him - hears nobody coming.
 Maidservants on the beds just now
 were picking berries from the bough,
 singing in chorus as directed
 (on orders which of course presume
 that thievish mouths cannot consume
 their masters' berries undetected
 so long as they're employed in song:
 such rustic cunning can't be wrong!) --


 The Song of the Girls

 ``Maidens, pretty maidens all,
 dear companions, darling friends,
 pretty maidens, romp away,
 have your fill of revelry!
 Strike the ditty up, my sweets,
 ditty of our secret world,
 and entice a fellow in
 to the circle of our dance.
 When we draw a fellow in,
 when we see him from afar,
 darlings, then we'll run away,
 cherries then we'll throw at him,
 cherries throw and raspberries
 and redcurrants throw at him.
 Never come and overhear
 ditties of our secret world,
 never come and like a spy
 watch the games we maidens play.''


 XL

 They sing; unmoved by their sweet-sounding
 choruses, Tanya can but wait,
 listless, impatient, for the pounding
 within her bosom to abate,
 and for her cheeks to cease their blushing;
 but wildly still her heart is rushing,
 and on her cheeks the fever stays,
 more and more brightly still they blaze.
 So the poor butterfly will quiver
 and beat a nacreous wing when caught
 by some perverse schoolboy for sport;
 and so in winter-fields will shiver
 the hare who from afar has seen
 a marksman crouching in the green.

 XLI

 But finally she heaved a yearning
 sigh, and stood up, began to pace;
 she walked, but just as she was turning
 into the all&eacute;e, face to face,
 she found Evgeny, eyes a-glitter,
 still as a shadow, grim and bitter;
 seared as by fire, she stopped. Today
 I lack the strength required to say
 what came from this unlooked-for meeting;
 my friends, I need to pause a spell,
 and walk, and breathe, before I tell
 a story that still wants completing;
 I need to rest from all this rhyme:
 I'll end my tale some other time.


 Notes to Chapter Three

 1 Stanza left incomplete by Pushkin.
 2 Heroine of Zhukovsky's poem of the same name.
 3 Julie, ou la nouvelle H&eacute;loise. by Rousseau, 1761.
 4 Hero of Mathilde, by Sophie Cottin, 1805.
 5 Lover of Val&eacute;rie, by Madame de Krudener, 1803.
 6 Delphine, by Madame de Sta&euml;l, 1805.
 7 Melmoth the Wanderer, by C. R. Mathurin, 1820.
 8 Jean Sbogar, by Charles Nodier, 1818.
 9 ``Lasciate ogni speranza, voi ch'entrate. Our modest author has translated only the first part of the famous verse.'' Pushkin's note.
 10 Magazine (1818) edited by A. Izmaylov.
 11 Russian poet and translator from the French.
 12 French poet (1755-1814). Author of Po&eacute;sies Erotiques.
 13 Evgeny Baratynsky (1800-1844). Poet and friend of Pushkin.
 --------
 Chapter Four

 La morale est dans la nature des choses.
 Necker

 (I, II, III, IV, V, VI,1) VII

 With womankind, the less we love them,
 the easier they become to charm,
 the tighter we can stretch above them
 enticing nets to do them harm.
 There was a period when cold-blooded
 debauchery was praised, and studied
 as love's technique, when it would blare
 its own perfection everywhere,
 and heartless pleasure was up-graded;
 yes, these were our forefathers' ways,
 those monkeys of the good old days:
 now Lovelace's renown has faded
 as scarlet heels have lost their name
 and stately periwigs, their fame.


 VIII

 How dull are acting and evasion,
 diversely urging the same plea,
 earnestly striving for persuasion
 on points that all long since agree --
 and always the self-same objection;
 how dull to work for the correction
 of prejudice that's never been
 harboured by maidens of thirteen!
 Who's not disgusted by cajoling,
 threats, vows, and simulated fears,
 by six-page letters, rings and tears,
 gossip, and tricks, and the patrolling
 of aunts and mothers, and the thrall
 of husband's friendship - worst of all!

 IX

 Evgeny thought in just this fashion.
 From his first youth he'd known the force,
 the sufferings of tempestuous passion;
 its winds had blown him far off course.
 Spoilt by the habit of indulgence,
 now dazzled by one thing's effulgence,
 now disenchanted with the next,
 more and more bored by yearning's text,
 bored by success' giddy trifle,
 he heard in stillness and in din
 a deathless murmur from within,
 found that in laughter yawns could stifle:
 he killed eight years in such a style,
 and wasted life's fine flower meanwhile.


 X

 Though belles had lost his adoration,
 he danced attendance with the best;
 rebuffed, found instant consolation;
 deceived, was overjoyed to rest.
 He followed them without illusion,
 lost them without regret's contusion,
 scarcely recalled their love, their spite;
 just like a casual guest who might
 devote to whist an evening party,
 who'd sit, and at the end of play
 would say goodbye and drive away,
 go off to sleep quite hale and hearty,
 and in the morning wouldn't know
 that self-same evening where he'd go.

 XI

 Yet Tanya's note made its impression
 on Eugene, he was deeply stirred:
 that virgin dream and its confession
 filled him with thoughts that swarmed and whirred;
 the flower-like pallor of the maiden,
 her look, so sweetly sorrow-laden,
 all plunged his soul deep in the stream
 of a delicious, guiltless dream...
 and though perhaps old fires were thrusting
 and held him briefly in their sway,
 Eugene had no wish to betray
 a soul so innocent, so trusting.
 But to the garden, to the scene
 where Tanya now confronts Eugene.


 XII

 Moments of silence, quite unbroken;
 then, stepping nearer, Eugene said:
 ``You wrote to me, and nothing spoken
 can disavow that. I have read
 those words where love, without condition,
 pours out its guiltless frank admission,
 and your sincerity of thought
 is dear to me, for it has brought
 feeling to what had long been heartless:
 but I won't praise you - let me join
 and pay my debt in the same coin
 with an avowal just as artless;
 hear my confession as I stand
 I leave the verdict in your hand.

 XIII

 ``Could I be happy circumscribing
 my life in a domestic plot;
 had fortune blest me by prescribing
 husband and father as my lot;
 could I accept for just a minute
 the homely scene, take pleasure in it --
 then I'd have looked for you alone
 to be the bride I'd call my own.
 Without romance, or false insistence,
 I'll say: with past ideals in view
 I would have chosen none but you
 as helpmeet in my sad existence,
 as gage of all things that were good,
 and been as happy... as I could!


 XIV

 ``But I was simply not intended
 for happiness - that alien role.
 Should your perfections be expended
 in vain on my unworthy soul?
 Believe (as conscience is my warrant),
 wedlock for us would be abhorrent.
 I'd love you, but inside a day,
 with custom, love would fade away;
 your tears would flow - but your emotion,
 your grief would fail to touch my heart,
 they'd just enrage it with their dart.
 What sort of roses, in your notion,
 would Hymen bring us - blooms that might
 last many a day, and many a night!

 XV

 ``What in the world is more distressing
 than households where the wife must moan
 the unworthy husband through depressing
 daytimes and evenings passed alone?
 and where the husband, recognizing
 her worth (but anathematising
 his destiny) without a smile
 bursts with cold envy and with bile?
 For such am I. When you were speaking
 to me so simply, with the fires
 and force that purity inspires,
 is this the man that you were seeking?
 can it be true you must await
 from cruel fortune such a fate?


 XVI

 ``I've dreams and years past resurrection;
 a soul that nothing can renew...
 I feel a brotherly affection,
 or something tenderer still, for you.
 Listen to me without resentment:
 girls often change to their contentment
 light dreams for new ones... so we see
 each springtime, on the growing tree,
 fresh leaves... for such is heaven's mandate.
 You'll love again, but you must teach
 your heart some self-restraint; for each
 and every man won't understand it
 as I have... learn from my belief
 that inexperience leads to grief.''

 XVII

 So went his sermon. Almost dying,
 blinded to everything about
 by mist of tears, without replying
 Tatyana heard Evgeny out.
 He gave his arm. In sad abstraction,
 by what's called machinal reaction,
 without a word Tatyana leant
 upon it, and with head down-bent
 walked homeward round the kitchen garden;
 together they arrived, and none
 dreamt of reproving what they'd done:
 by country freedom, rightful pardon
 and happy licence are allowed,
 as much as in Moscow the proud.


 XVIII

 Agree, the way Eugene proceeded
 with our poor girl was kind and good;
 not for the first time he succeeded
 in manifesting, as he could,
 a truly noble disposition;
 yet people's malice and suspicion
 persisted and made no amends.
 By enemies, no less by friends
 (it's all the same - you well correct us),
 he found all kinds of brickbat hurled.
 We each have enemies in this world,
 but from our friends, good Lord protect us!
 Those friends, those friends! it is, I fear,
 with cause that I've recalled them here.

 XIX

 What of it? Nothing. I'm just sending
 to sleep some black and empty dreams;
 but, inside brackets, I'm contending
 there's no ignoble tale that seems
 cooked-up where garret-vermin babble,
 endorsed by fashionable rabble,
 there's no absurdity as such,
 no vulgar epigram too much,
 which smilingly your friend, supported
 by decent company, has not,
 without a trace of spite or plot,
 a hundred times afresh distorted;
 yet he'd back you through thick and thin:
 he loves you... like your kith and kin!


 XX

 Hm, hm. Distinguished reader, tell me
 how are your kith and kin today?
 And here my sentiments impel me
 for your enlightenment to say
 how I interpret this expression:
 our kin are folk whom by profession
 we have to cherish and admire
 with all our hearts, and who require
 that in the usual Christmas scrimmage
 we visit them, or without fail
 send them good wishes through the mail
 to ensure that till next time our image
 won't even cross their minds by stealth...
 God grant them years and years of health!

 XXI

 Of course, the love of tender beauties,
 surer than friendship or than kin,
 will loyally discharge its duties,
 in midst of trouble, storm or din.
 Of course. Yet fashion's wild rotation,
 yet a capricious inclination,
 yet floods of talk around the town...
 the darling sex is light as down.
 Then verdicts from her husband's quartet
 are bound, by every virtuous wife,
 to be respected all through life:
 and so your faithfullest supporter
 will disappear as fast as smoke:
 for Satan, love's a splendid joke.


 XXII

 Whom then to credit? Whom to treasure?
 On whom alone can we depend?
 Who is there who will truly measure
 his acts and words to suit our end?
 Who'll sow no calumnies around us?
 Whose fond attentions will astound us?
 Who'll never fault our vices, or
 whom shall we never find a bore?
 Don't let a ghost be your bear-leader,
 don't waste your efforts on the air.
 Just let yourself be your whole care,
 your loved one, honourable reader!
 Deserving object: there can be
 nothing more lovable than he.

 XXIII

 Then what resulted from the meeting?
 Alas, it's not so hard to guess!
 Love's frantic torments went on beating
 and racking with their strain and stress
 that youthful soul, which pined for sadness;
 no, all devoured by passion's madness
 poor Tanya more intensely burns;
 sleep runs from her, she turns and turns...
 and health, life's sweetness and its shimmer,
 smiles, and a maiden's tranquil poise,
 have vanished, like an empty noise,
 while dear Tatyana's youth grows dimmer:
 so a storm-shadow wraps away
 in dark attire the new-born day.


 XXIV

 Poor Tanya's bloom begins to languish,
 and pale, and fade without a word!
 there's nothing can employ her anguish,
 no sound by which her soul is stirred.
 Neighbours in whispered tones are taking
 council, and with profound head-shaking
 conclude that it's high time she wed!...
 But that's enough. At once, in stead,
 I'll gladden your imagination,
 reader, by painting you a scene
 of happy love. For I have been
 too long, against my inclination,
 held in constraint by pity's touch:
 I love my Tatyana too much!

 XXV

 From hour to hour a surer capture
 for Olga's beauty, Lensky gives
 his soul to a delicious rapture
 that fills him and in which he lives.
 He's always with her: either seated
 in darkness in her room, or treated
 to garden walks, as arm in arm
 they while away the morning's calm.
 What else? Quite drunk with love's illusion,
 he even dares, once in a while,
 emboldened by his Olga's smile,
 and plunged in tender shame's confusion,
 to play with a dishevelled tress,
 or kiss the border of her dress.


 XXVI

 He reads to Olga on occasion,
 for her improvement, a roman,
 of moralistical persuasion,
 more searching than Chateaubriand;
 but in it there are certain pages
 (vain twaddle, fables of the ages,
 talk that might turn a young girl's head)
 which with a blush he leaves unread.
 As far removed as they were able
 from all the world, they sat and pored
 in deepest thought at the chess-board
 for hours, with elbows on the table --
 then Lensky moved his pawn, and took,
 deep in distraction, his own rook.

 XXVII

 Even at home his occupation
 is only Olga: he relieves
 with careful schemes of decoration
 an album's loose and floating sheaves.
 Sometimes a landscape's represented,
 a tomb, a Cyprian shrine's invented,
 a lyre, and on it perched, a dove --
 in ink with colour-wash above;
 then on the leaves of recollection,
 below the others who have signed
 he leaves a tender verse behind,
 a dream's mute monument, reflection
 of instant thoughts, a fleeting trace
 still after many years in place.


 XXVIII

 Often of course you'll have inspected
 the album of a country miss
 where scribbling friends have interjected
 frontwise and back, that way and this.
 With spelling scrambled to perdition,
 the unmetric verses of tradition
 are entered here, in friendship's gage,
 shortened, or lengthened off the page.
 On the first sheet you'll find a question:
 ``Qu'&eacute;crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?''
 and, under, ``toute &agrave; vous Annette'';
 then, on the last page, the suggestion:
 ``who loves you more than I, let's see
 him prove it, writing after me.''

 XXIX

 There you're entirely sure of finding
 two hearts, a torch, and a nosegay;
 and there, love's protestations, binding
 until the tombstone; there one day
 some regimental bard has added
 a stanza villainously padded.
 In such an album, friends, I too
 am always glad to write, it's true,
 convinced at heart that my most zealous
 nonsense will earn indulgent looks,
 nor will my scribbling in such books
 attract the sneering of the jealous,
 or make men seriously discuss
 if I show wit in jesting thus.


 XXX

 But you, grand tomes I loathe with passion,
 odd volumes from the devil's shelf,
 in which the rhymester-man-of-fashion
 is forced to crucify himself,
 portfolios nobly illustrated
 with Tolstoy's2 brush, or decorated
 by Baratynsky's3 wondrous pen,
 God's thunder burn you up! And when
 some splendid lady is referring
 to me her best in-quarto tome,
 the fear and rage with which I foam!
 Deep down, an epigram is stirring
 that I'm just longing to indite --
 but madrigals I've got to write!

 XXXI

 No madrigals were for inscribing
 by Lensky in his Olga's book;
 his style breathed love, and not the gibing
 coldness of wit; each note he took,
 each news of her he'd been imbibing --
 all was material for transcribing:
 with lively and pellucid look,
 his elegies flow like a brook.
 So you, inspired Yaz&yacute;kov,4 sobbing
 with bursts of passion from the heart,
 sing God knows whom, compose with art
 a suite of elegies that, throbbing,
 sooner or later will relate
 the entire story of your fate.


 XXXII

 But soft! You hear? A scowling critic,
 bidding us to reject for good
 the elegy, grown paralytic,
 commands our rhymester-brotherhood:
 ``oh, quit your stale, your tedious quacking,
 and your alas-ing and alack-ing
 about what's buried in the past:
 sing about something else at last!''
 All right, you want the resurrection
 of trumpet, dagger, mask and sword,
 and dead ideas from that old hoard,
 all brought to life at your direction.
 Not so? ``No, sirs, the ode's the thing,
 that's the refrain that you should sing,

 XXXIII

 ``as sung of old, in years of glory,
 as instituted long ago.''
 Only the ode, that solemn story!
 Enough, my friends; it's all so-so.
 Remember the retort satiric!
 Is Others' View,5 that clever lyric,
 really more bearable to you
 than what our sorrowing rhymesters do?
 ``The elegy's just vain protesting,
 empty the purpose it proclaims,
 while odes have high and noble aims...''
 That point I wouldn't mind contesting,
 but hold my tongue, lest it appears
 I'll set two ages by the ears.


 XXXIV

 In love with fame, by freedom smitten,
 with storm and tumult in his head,
 what odes Vladimir might have written --
 but Olga would have never read!
 Bards of our tearful generation,
 have you read lines of your creation
 to your loved ones? They do maintain
 that this of all things for a swain
 is the supreme reward. Precisely,
 blest the poor lover who reads out
 his dreams, while she whom they're about,
 that languid beauty, listens nicely --
 blest... though perhaps her fancy's caught
 in fact by some quite different thought.

 XXXV

 But I myself read my bedizened
 fancies, my rhythmic search for truth,
 to nobody except a wizened
 nanny, companion of my youth;
 or, after some dull dinner's labour,
 I buttonhole a wandering neighbour
 and in a corner make him choke
 on tragedy; but it's no joke,
 when, utterly worn out by rhyming,
 exhausted and done up, I take
 a rambling walk beside my lake,
 and duck get up; with instant timing,
 alarmed by my melodious lay,
 they leave their shores and fly away.


 XXXVI6

 &lt; My gaze pursues them... but on station
 the hunter in the wood will swear
 at verse, and hiss an imprecation,
 and ease his catch with all due care.
 We each enjoy a special hobby,
 each of us has his favourite lobby:
 one sees a duck and aims his gun,
 one raves in verse like me, and one
 hunts cheeky flies, with swatter sweeping,
 one leads the multitude in thought,
 one finds in war amusing sport,
 one wallows in delicious weeping;
 the wine-addict adores the cup:
 and good and bad are all mixed up. &gt;

 XXXVII

 But what about Eugene? With reason
 reader, you ask, and I'll expound --
 craving your tolerance in season --
 the programme of his daily round.
 In summertime - for he was leading
 a hermit's life - he'd be proceeding
 on foot, by seven o'clock, until
 he reached the stream below the hill;
 lightly attired, like the creator
 of Gulnare, he would play a card
 out of the hand of that same bard:
 he'd swim this Hellespont; then later
 he'd drink his coffee, flutter through
 the pages of some dull review,
 then dress...


 (XXXVIII) XXXIX

 Books, riding, walks, sleep heavy-laden,
 the shady wood, the talking stream;
 sometimes from a fair, black-eyed maiden
 the kiss where youth and freshness gleam;
 a steed responsive to the bridle,
 and dinner with a touch of idle
 fancy, a wine serene in mood,
 tranquillity, and solitude --
 Onegin's life, you see, was holy;
 unconsciously he let it mount
 its grip on him, forgot to count
 bright summer days that passed so slowly,
 forgot to think of town and friends
 and tedious means to festive ends.

 XL

 Our evanescent northern summer
 parodies winter in the south;
 it's like a vanishing newcomer --
 but here we must control our mouth.
 The sky breathed autumn, time was flowing,
 and good old sun more seldom glowing;
 the days grew shorter, in the glade
 with mournful sound the secret shade
 was stripped away, and mists encroaching
 lay on the fields; in caravan
 the clamorous honking geese began
 their southward flight: one saw approaching
 the season which is such a bore --
 November stood outside the door.


 XLI

 Dawn comes in mist and chill; no longer
 do fields echo with work and shout;
 in pairs, their hunger driving stronger,
 on the highroad the wolves come out;
 the horse gets wind of them and, snorting,
 sets the wise traveller cavorting
 up the hillside at breakneck pace;
 no longer does the herdsman chase
 his beasts outdoors at dawn, nor ringing
 at noontime does his horn resound
 as it assembles them around;
 while in the hut a girl is singing;
 she spins and, friend of winter nights,
 the matchwood chatters as it lights.

 XLII

 Hoar-frost that crackles with a will is
 already silvering all the plain...
 (the reader thinks the rhyme is lilies:
 here, seize it quick for this quatrain!)
 Like modish parquetry, the river
 glitters beneath its icing-sliver;
 boy-tribes with skates on loudly slice
 their joyous way across the ice;
 a red-foot goose, weight something fearful,
 anticipates a swim, in stead
 tries out the ice with cautious tread,
 and skids and tumbles down; the cheerful
 first flakes of snow whirl round and sink
 in stars upon the river-brink.


 XLIII

 In backwoods, how d'you pass this season?
 Walking? The country that you roam
 is a compulsive bore by reason
 of its unvarnished monochrome.
 Riding on the lugubrious prairie?
 Your horse, blunt-shoed and all unwary,
 will find the ice elude his grip
 and, any moment, down he'll slip.
 Or, in your lonely homestead, moping,
 you'll read: here's Pradt,7 here's Walter Scott!
 to pass the evening. No? then tot
 up your accounts, and raging, toping,
 let evening pass, tomorrow too --
 in triumph you'll see winter through!

 XLIV

 Childe-Harold-like, Eugene's devoting
 his hours to dreaming them away:
 he wakes; a bath where ice is floating;
 and then, indoors the livelong day,
 alone, and sunk in calculation,
 with a blunt cue for the duration,
 from early morning on he will
 at two-ball billiards prove his skill;
 then, country evening fast arriving,
 billiards are dropped, cue put to bed:
 before the fire a table's spread;
 Evgeny waits: and here comes driving,
 with three roan horses in a line
 Vladimir Lensky. Quick, let's dine!


 XLV

 From widow Clicquot and from Mo&euml;t,
 the draught whose blessings are agreed,
 in frosted bottle, for the poet
 is brought to table at full speed.
 Bubbles like Hippocrene are spraying;
 once, with its foaming and its playing,
 (a simile of this and that)
 it held me captive; tit for tat,
 friends, recollect how I surrendered
 my last poor lepton for a sup!
 recall, by its bewitching cup,
 how many follies were engendered;
 how many lines of verse, and themes
 for jokes, and rows, and merry dreams!

 XLVI

 Yet hissing froth deals a malicious,
 perfidious blow to my inside,
 and now it's Bordeaux the Judicious
 that I prefer to Champagne's tide;
 to A&yuml;'s vintage in the sequel
 I find myself no longer equal;
 for, mistress-like, it's brilliant, vain,
 lively, capricious, and inane...
 But in misfortune or displeasure,
 Bordeaux, you're like a faithful friend,
 a true companion to the end,
 ready to share our quiet leisure
 with your good offices, and so
 long life to our dear friend, Bordeaux!


 XLVII

 The fire was dying; cinders faintly
 covered the golden coal - the steam
 tumbled and whirled and twisted quaintly
 its barely noticeable stream.
 The hearth was low beyond all stoking.
 Straight up the chimney, pipes were smoking.
 Still on the board, the beakers hissed,
 and evening now drew on in mist...
 (I like a friendly conversation,
 the enjoyment of a friendly drink,
 at hours, which, why I cannot think,
 somehow have got the designation
 of time between the wolf and dog.)
 Now hear the friends in dialogue:

 XLVIII

 ``Tell me, our neighbours, are they thriving?
 and how's Tatyana? Olga too,
 your dashing one, is she surviving?''
 ``Just half a glass more... that will do...
 All flourishing; they send their duty.
 Take Olga's shoulders now - the beauty!
 What breasts! What soul!... We'll go one day
 visit the family, what d'you say?
 if you come with me, they'll be flattered;
 or else, my friend, how does it look?
 you called there twice, and since then took
 no notice of them. But I've chattered
 so much, I'm left no time to speak!
 of course! you're bidden there next week.''


 XLIX

 ``I?'' ``Saturday. The invitation
 Olinka and her mother sent:
 Tatyana's name day celebration.
 It's right and proper that you went.''
 ``But there'll be such a rout and scrabble
 with every different kind of rabble...''
 ``No, no, I'm sure the party's small.
 Relations. No-one else at all.
 Let's go, our friendship's worth the labour!''
 ``All right, I'll come then...'' ``What a friend!''
 He drained his glass down to the end
 by way of toast to their fair neighbour;
 then he began to talk once more
 of Olga: love's that kind of bore!

 L

 Lensky rejoiced. His designated
 rapture was just two weeks ahead;
 love's crown, delectable, awaited
 his transports, and the marriage-bed
 in all its mystery. Hymen's teasing,
 the pain, the grief, the marrow-freezing
 onset of the incipient yawn,
 were from his vision quite withdrawn.
 While under the connubial banner
 I can see naught, as Hymen's foe,
 beyond a string of dull tableaux,
 a novel in Lafontaine's8 manner...
 my wretched Lensky in his heart
 was just created for the part.


 LI

 And he was loved... at least he never
 doubted of it, so lived in bliss.
 Happy a hundredfold, whoever
 can lean on faith, who can dismiss
 cold reason, sleep in sensual welter
 like a drunk traveller in a shelter,
 or, sweeter, like a butterfly
 in flowers of spring it's drinking dry:
 but piteous he, the all-foreseeing,
 the sober head, detesting each
 human reaction, every speech
 in the expression of its being,
 whose heart experience has cooled
 and saved from being charmed or fooled!


 Notes to Chapter Four

 1 Stanzas I to VI were discarded by Pushkin.
 2 Count F. P. Tolstoy (1783-1873), well-known artist.
 3 See Chapter Three, note 13.
 4 Poet and acquaintance of Pushkin.
 5 Satiric poem by Ivan Dimitriev, 1795. The reference is - summarizing very briefly - to a controversy between different literary cliques about the relative merits of the classic ode and the romantic elegy.
 6 Stanza discarded by Pushkin, also stanza XXXVIII.
 7 Dominique de Pradt (1759-1837), voluminous French political writer.
 8 August Lafontaine (1758-1851), German novelist of family life.
 --------
 Chapter Five

 O, never know these frightful dreams,
 thou, my Svetlana!
 Zhukovsky

 I

 That year the season was belated
 and autumn lingered, long and slow;
 expecting winter, nature waited --
 only in January the snow,
 night of the second, started flaking.
 Next day Tatyana, early waking,
 saw through the window, morning-bright,
 roofs, flowerbeds, fences, all in white,
 panes patterned by the finest printer,
 with trees decked in their silvery kit,
 and jolly magpies on the flit,
 and hills that delicately winter
 had with its brilliant mantle crowned --
 and glittering whiteness all around.


 II

 Winter!... The countryman, enchanted,
 breaks a new passage with his sleigh;
 his nag has smelt the snow, and planted
 a shambling hoof along the way;
 a saucy kib&iacute;tka is slicing
 its furrow through the powdery icing;
 the driver sits and cuts a dash
 in sheepskin coat with scarlet sash.
 Here comes the yard-boy, who has chosen
 his pup to grace the sledge, while he
 becomes a horse for all to see;
 the rogue has got a finger frozen:
 it hurts, he laughs, and all in vain
 his mother taps the window-pane.

 III

 But you perhaps find no attraction
 in any picture of this kind:
 for nature's unadorned reaction
 has something low and unrefined.
 Fired by the god of inspiration,
 another bard1 in exaltation
 has painted for us the first snow
 with each nuance of wintry glow:
 he'll charm you with his fine invention,
 he'll take you prisoner, you'll admire
 secret sledge-rides in verse of fire;
 but I've not got the least intention
 just now of wrestling with his shade,
 nor his,2 who sings of Finland's maid.


 IV

 Tanya (profoundly Russian being,
 herself not knowing how or why)
 in Russian winters thrilled at seeing
 the cold perfection of the sky,
 hoar-frost and sun in freezing weather,
 sledges, and tardy dawns together
 with the pink glow the snows assume
 and festal evenings in the gloom.
 The Larins kept the old tradition:
 maid-servants from the whole estate
 would on those evenings guess the fate
 of the two girls; their premonition
 pointed each year, for time to come,
 at soldier-husbands, and the drum.

 V

 Tatyana shared with full conviction
 the simple faith of olden days
 in dreams and cards and their prediction,
 and portents of the lunar phase.
 Omens dismayed her with their presage;
 each object held a secret message
 for her instruction, and her breast
 was by forebodings much oppressed.
 The tomcat, mannered and affected,
 that sat above the stove and purred
 and washed its face, to her brought word
 that visitors must be expected.
 If suddenly aloft she spied
 the new moon, horned, on her left side,


 VI

 her face would pale, she'd start to quiver.
 In the dark sky, a shooting star
 that fell, and then began to shiver,
 would fill Tatyana from afar
 with perturbation and with worry;
 and while the star still flew, she'd hurry
 to whisper it her inmost prayer.
 And if she happened anywhere
 to meet a black monk, or if crossing
 her path a hare in headlong flight
 ran through the fields, sheer panic fright
 would leave her dithering and tossing.
 By dire presentiment awestruck,
 already she'd assume ill-luck.

 VII

 Yet - fear itself she found presented
 a hidden beauty in the end:
 our disposition being invented
 by nature, contradiction's friend.
 Christmas came on. What joy, what gladness!
 Yes, youth divines, in giddy madness,
 youth which has nothing to regret,
 before which life's horizon yet
 lies bright, and vast beyond perceiving;
 spectacled age divines as well,
 although it's nearly heard the knell,
 and all is lost beyond retrieving;
 no matter: hope, in child's disguise,
 is there to lisp its pack of lies.


 VIII

 Tatyana looks with pulses racing
 at sunken wax inside a bowl:
 beyond a doubt, its wondrous tracing
 foretells for her some wondrous role;
 from dish of water, rings are shifted
 in due succession; hers is lifted
 and at the very self-same time
 the girls sing out the ancient rhyme:
 ``The peasants there have wealth abounding,
 they heap up silver with a spade;
 and those we sing for will be paid
 in goods and fame!'' But the sad-sounding
 ditty portends a loss; more dear
 is ``Kit''3 to every maiden's ear.

 IX

 The sky is clear, the earth is frozen;
 the heavenly lights in glorious quire
 tread the calm, settled path they've chosen...
 Tatyana in low-cut attire
 goes out into the courtyard spaces
 and trains a mirror till it faces
 the moon; but in the darkened glass
 the only face to shake and pass
 is sad old moon's... Hark! snow is creaking...
 a passer-by; and on tiptoe
 she flies as fast as she can go;
 and ``what's your name?'' she asks him, speaking
 in a melodious, flute-like tone.
 He looks, and answers: ``Agafon.''4


 X

 Prepared for prophecy and fable,
 she did what nurse advised she do
 and in the bath-house had a table
 that night, in secret, set for two;
 then sudden fear attacked Tatyana...
 I too - when I recall Svetlana5
 I'm terrified - so let it be...
 Tatyana's rites are not for me.
 She's dropped her sash's silken billow;
 Tanya's undressed, and lies in bed.
 Lel6 floats about above her head;
 and underneath her downy pillow
 a young girl's looking-glass is kept.
 Now all was still. Tatyana slept.

 XI

 She dreamt of portents. In her dreaming
 she walked across a snowy plain
 through gloom and mist; and there came streaming
 a furious, boiling, heaving main
 across the drift-encumbered acres,
 a raging torrent, capped with breakers,
 a flood on which no frosty band
 had been imposed by winter's hand;
 two poles that ice had glued like plaster
 were placed across the gulf to make
 a flimsy bridge whose every quake
 spelt hazard, ruin and disaster;
 she stopped at the loud torrent's bound,
 perplexed... and rooted to the ground.


 XII

 As if before some mournful parting
 Tatyana groaned above the tide;
 she saw no friendly figure starting
 to help her from the other side;
 but suddenly a snowdrift rumbled,
 and what came out? a hairy, tumbled,
 enormous bear; Tatyana yelled,
 the bear let out a roar, and held
 a sharp-nailed paw towards her; bracing
 her nerves, she leant on it her weight,
 and with a halting, trembling gait
 above the water started tracing
 her way; she passed, then as she walked
 the bear - what next? - behind her stalked.

 XIII

 A backward look is fraught with danger;
 she speeds her footsteps to a race,
 but from her shaggy-liveried ranger
 she can't escape at any pace --
 the odious bear still grunts and lumbers.
 Ahead of them a pinewood slumbers
 in the full beauty of its frown;
 the branches all are weighted down
 with tufts of snow; and through the lifted
 summits of aspen, birch and lime,
 the nightly luminaries climb.
 No path to see: the snow has drifted
 across each bush, across each steep,
 and all the world is buried deep.


 XIV

 She's in the wood, the bear still trails her.
 There's powdery snow up to her knees;
 now a protruding branch assails her
 and clasps her neck; and now she sees
 her golden earrings off and whipping;
 and now the crunchy snow is stripping
 her darling foot of its wet shoe,
 her handkerchief has fallen too;
 no time to pick it up - she's dying
 with fright, she hears the approaching bear;
 her fingers shake, she doesn't dare
 to lift her skirt up; still she's flying,
 and he pursuing, till at length
 she flies no more, she's lost her strength.

 XV

 She's fallen in the snow - alertly
 the bear has raised her in his paws;
 and she, submissively, inertly --
 no move she makes, no breath she draws;
 he whirls her through the wood... a hovel
 shows up through trees, all of a grovel
 in darkest forest depths and drowned
 by dreary snowdrifts piled around;
 there's a small window shining in it,
 and from within come noise and cheer;
 the bear explains: ``my cousin's here --
 come in and warm yourself a minute!''
 he carries her inside the door
 and sets her gently on the floor.


 XVI

 Tatyana looks, her faintness passes:
 bear's gone; a hallway, no mistake;
 behind the door the clash of glasses
 and shouts suggest a crowded wake;
 so, seeing there no rhyme or reason,
 no meaning in or out of season,
 she peers discreetly through a chink
 and sees... whatever do you think?
 a group of monsters round a table,
 a dog with horns, a goatee'd witch,
 a rooster head, and on the twitch
 a skeleton jerked by a cable,
 a dwarf with tail, and a half-strain,
 a hybrid cross of cat and crane.

 XVII

 But ever stranger and more fearful:
 a crayfish rides on spider-back;
 on goose's neck, a skull looks cheerful
 and swaggers in a red calpack;
 with bended knees a windmill dances,
 its sails go flap-flap as it prances;
 song, laughter, whistle, bark and champ,
 and human words, and horse's stamp!
 But how she jumped, when in this hovel
 among the guests she recognized
 the man she feared and idolized --
 who else? - the hero of our novel!
 Onegin sits at table too,
 he eyes the door, looks slyly through.


 XVIII

 He nods - they start to fuss and truckle;
 he drinks - all shout and take a swill;
 he laughs - they all begin to chuckle;
 he scowls - and the whole gang are still;
 he's host, that's obvious. Thus enlightened
 Tanya's no longer quite so frightened
 and, curious now about the lot,
 opens the door a tiny slot...
 but then a sudden breeze surprises,
 puts out the lamps; the whole brigade
 of house-familiars stands dismayed...
 with eyes aflame Onegin rises
 from table, clattering on the floor;
 all stand. He walks towards the door.

 XIX

 Now she's alarmed; in desperate worry
 Tatyana struggles to run out --
 she can't; and in her panic hurry
 she flails around, she tries to shout --
 she can't; Evgeny's pushed the portal,
 and to the vision of those mortal
 monsters the maiden stood revealed.
 Wildly the fearful laughter pealed;
 the eyes of all, the hooves, the snozzles,
 the bleeding tongues, the tufted tails,
 the tusks, the corpse's finger-nails,
 the horns, and the moustachio'd nozzles --
 all point at her, and all combine
 to bellow out: ``she's mine, she's mine.''


 XX

 ``She's mine!'' Evgeny's voice of thunder
 clears in a flash the freezing room;
 the whole thieves' kitchen flies asunder,
 the girl remains there in the gloom
 alone with him; Onegin takes her
 into a corner, gently makes her
 sit on a flimsy bench, and lays
 his head upon her shoulder... blaze
 of sudden brightness... it's too curious...
 Olga's appeared upon the scene,
 and Lensky follows her... Eugene,
 eyes rolling, arms uplifted, furious,
 damns the intruders; Tanya lies
 and almost swoons, and almost dies.

 XXI

 Louder and louder sounds the wrangle:
 Eugene has caught up, quick as quick,
 a carving-knife - and in the tangle
 Lensky's thrown down. The murk is thick
 and growing thicker; then, heart-shaking,
 a scream rings out... the cabin's quaking...
 Tanya comes to in utter fright...
 she looks, the room is getting light --
 outside, the scarlet rays of dawning
 play on the window's frosted lace;
 in through the door, at swallow's pace,
 pinker than glow of Northern morning,
 flits Olga: ``now, tell me straight out,
 who was it that you dreamt about?''


 XXII

 Deaf to her sister's intervention,
 Tatyana simply lay in bed,
 devoured a book with rapt attention,
 and kept quite silent while she read.
 The book displayed, not so you'd know it,
 no magic fancies of the poet,
 no brilliant truth, no vivid scene;
 and yet by Vergil or Racine
 by Scott, by Seneca, or Byron,
 even by Ladies' Fashion Post,
 no one was ever so engrossed:
 Martin Zad&eacute;ka was the siren,
 dean of Chaldea's learned team,
 arch-commentator of the dream.

 XXIII

 This work of the profoundest learning
 was brought there by a huckster who
 one day came down that lonely turning,
 and to Tanya, when he was through,
 swapped it for odd tomes of Malvina,
 but just to make the bargain keener,
 he charged three roubles and a half,
 and took two Petriads in calf,
 a grammar, a digest of fable,
 and volume three of Marmontel.
 Since then Martin Zad&eacute;ka's spell
 bewitches Tanya... he is able
 to comfort her in all her woes,
 and every night shares her repose.


 XXIV

 Tatyana's haunted by her vision,
 plagued by her ghastly dream, and tries
 to puzzle out with some precision
 just what the nightmare signifies.
 Searching the table exegetic
 she finds, in order alphabetic:
 bear, blackness, blizzard, bridge and crow,
 fir, forest, hedgehog, raven, snow
 etcetera. But her trepidation
 Martin Zad&eacute;ka fails to mend;
 the horrid nightmare must portend
 a hideous deal of tribulation.
 For several days she peaked and pined
 in deep anxiety of mind.

 XXV

 But now Aurora's crimson fingers
 from daybreak valleys lift the sun;
 the morning light no longer lingers,
 the festal name day has begun.
 Since dawn, whole families have been driving
 towards the Larins' and arriving
 in sledded coaches and coup&eacute;s,
 in britzkas, kib&iacute;tkas and sleighs.
 The hall is full of noise and hustle,
 in the salon new faces meet,
 and kisses smack as young girls greet;
 there's yap of pugs, and laughs, and bustle;
 the threshold's thronged, wet-nurses call,
 guests bow, feet scrape, and children squall.


 XXVI

 Here with his wife, that bulging charmer,
 fat P&uacute;styakov has driven in;
 Gvozd&iacute;n, exemplary farmer,
 whose serfs are miserably thin;
 and the Skot&iacute;nins, grizzled sages,
 with broods of children of all ages,
 from thirty down to two; and stop,
 here's Petushk&oacute;v, the local fop;
 and look, my cousin's come, Buy&aacute;nov,
 in a peaked cap, all dust and fluff, --
 you'll recognize him soon enough, --
 and counsellor (retired) Fly&aacute;nov,
 that rogue, backbiter, pantaloon,
 bribe-taker, glutton and buffoon.

 XXVII

 Here, in his red peruke and glasses,
 late of Tambov, Monsieur Triquet
 has come with Kharlikov; he passes
 for witty; in his Gallic way
 inside a pocket Triquet nurses,
 addressed to Tanya, certain verses
 set to well-known children's glee:
 ``r&eacute;veillez-vous, belle endormie.''
 He found them in some old collection,
 printed among outmoded airs;
 Triquet, ingenious poet, dares
 to undertake their resurrection,
 and for belle Nina, as it read,
 he's put belle Tatiana instead.


 XXVIII

 And from the nearby Army station
 the Major's here: he's all the rage
 with our Mamas, and a sensation
 with demoiselles of riper age;
 his news has set the party humming!
 the regimental band is coming,
 sent at the Colonel's own behest.
 A ball: the joy of every guest!
 Young ladies jump for future blisses...
 But dinner's served, so two by two
 and arm in arm they all go through;
 round Tanya congregate the misses,
 the men confront them, face to face:
 they sit, they cross themselves for grace.

 XXIX

 They buzz - but then all talk's suspended --
 jaws masticate as minutes pass:
 the crash of plates and knives is blended
 with the resounding chime of glass.
 And now there's gradually beginning
 among the guests a general dinning:
 none listens when the others speak,
 all shout and argue, laugh and squeak.
 Then doors are opened, Lensky enters,
 Onegin too. ``Good Lord, at last!''
 the hostess cries and, moving fast,
 the guests squeeze closer to the centres;
 they shove each plate, and every chair,
 and shout, and make room for the pair.


 XXX

 Just facing Tanya's where they're sitting;
 and paler than the moon at dawn,
 she lowers darkened eyes, unwitting,
 and trembles like a hunted fawn.
 From violent passions fast pulsating
 she's nearly swooned, she's suffocating;
 the friends' salute she never hears
 and from her eyes the eager tears
 are almost bursting; she's quite ready,
 poor girl, to drop into a faint,
 but will, and reason's strong constraint,
 prevailed, and with composure steady
 she sat there; through her teeth a word
 came out so soft, it scarce was heard.

 XXXI

 The nervous-tragical reaction,
 girls' tears, their swooning, for Eugene
 had long proved tedious to distraction:
 he knew too well that sort of scene.
 Now, faced with this enormous revel,
 he'd got annoyed, the tricky devil.
 He saw the sad girl's trembling state,
 looked down in an access of hate,
 pouted, and swore in furious passion
 to wreak, by stirring Lensky's ire,
 the best revenge one could desire.
 Already, in exultant fashion,
 he watched the guests and, as he dined,
 caricatured them in his mind.


 XXXII

 Tanya's distress had risked detection
 not only by Evgeny's eye;
 but looks and talk took the direction,
 that moment, of a luscious pie
 (alas, too salted); now they're bringing
 bottles to which some pitch is clinging:
 Tsimlyansky wine, between the meat
 and the blancmanger, then a fleet
 of goblets, tall and slender pretties;
 how they remind me of your stem,
 Zizi, my crystal and my gem,
 you object of my guileless ditties!
 with draughts from love's enticing flask,
 you made me drunk as one could ask!

 XXXIII

 Freed from its dripping cork, the bottle
 explodes; wine fizzes up... but stay:
 solemn, too long compelled to throttle
 his itching verse, Monsieur Triquet
 is on his feet - in utter stillness
 the party waits. Seized with an illness
 of swooning, Tanya nearly dies;
 and, scroll in hand, before her eyes
 Triquet sings, out of tune. Loud clapping
 and cheers salute him. Tanya must
 thank him by curtseying to the dust;
 great bard despite his modest trapping,
 he's first to toast her in the bowl,
 then he presents her with the scroll.


 XXXIV

 Compliment and congratulation;
 Tanya thanks each one with a phrase.
 When Eugene's turn for salutation
 arrives, the girl's exhausted gaze,
 her discomposure, her confusion,
 expose his soul to an intrusion
 of pity: in his silent bow,
 and in his look there shows somehow
 a wondrous tenderness. And whether
 it was that he'd been truly stirred,
 or half-unwittingly preferred
 a joking flirt, or both together,
 there was a softness in his glance:
 it brought back Tanya from her trance.

 XXXV

 Chairs are pushed outward, loudly rumbling,
 and all into the salon squeeze,
 as from their luscious hive go tumbling
 fieldward, in noisy swarm, the bees.
 The banquet's given no cause for sneezing,
 neighbours in high content are wheezing;
 ladies at the fireside confer,
 in corners whispering girls concur;
 now, by green tablecloths awaited,
 the eager players are enrolled --
 Boston and ombre for the old,
 and whist, that's now so keenly f&ecirc;ted --
 pursuits of a monotonous breed
 begot by boredom out of greed.


 XXXVI

 By now whist's heroes have completed
 eight rubbers; and by now eight times
 they've moved around and been reseated;
 and tea's brought in. Instead of chimes
 I like to tell the time by dinner
 and tea and supper; there's an inner
 clock in the country rings the hour;
 no fuss; our belly has the power
 of any Br&eacute;guet: and in passing
 I'll just remark, my verses talk
 as much of banquets and the cork
 and eatables beyond all classing
 as yours did, Homer, godlike lord,
 whom thirty centuries have adored!

 &lt; XXXVII7

 At feasts, though, full of pert aggression,
 I put your genius to the test,
 I make magnanimous confession,
 in other things you come off best:
 your heroes, raging and ferocious,
 your battles, lawless and atrocious,
 your Zeus, your Cypris, your whole band
 have clearly got the upper hand
 of Eugene, cold as all creation,
 of plains where boredom reigns complete,
 or of Ist&oacute;mina, my sweet,
 and all our modish education;
 but your vile Helen's not my star --
 no, Tanya's more endearing far.


 XXXVIII

 No one will think that worth gainsaying,
 though Menelaus, in Helen's name,
 may spend a century in flaying
 the hapless Phrygians all the same,
 and although Troy's greybeards, collected
 around Priam the much-respected,
 may chorus, when she comes in sight,
 that Menelaus was quite right --
 and Paris too. But hear my pleading:
 as battles go, I've not begun;
 don't judge the race before it's run --
 be good enough to go on reading:
 there'll be a fight. For that I give
 my word; no welshing, as I live. &gt;

 XXXIX

 Here's tea: the girls have just, as bidden,
 taken the saucers in their grip,
 when, from behind the doorway, hidden
 bassoons and flutes begin to trip.
 Elated by the music's blaring,
 Petushk&oacute;v, local Paris, tearing,
 his tea with rum quite left behind,
 approaches Olga; Lensky's signed
 Tatyana on; Miss Kharlikova,
 that nubile maid of riper age,
 is seized by Tambov's poet-sage;
 Buy&aacute;nov whirls off Pustyakova;
 they all have swarmed into the hall,
 and in full brilliance shines the ball.


 XL

 Right at the outset of my story
 (if you'll turn back to chapter one)
 I meant to paint, with Alban's8 glory,
 a ball in Petersburg; but fun
 and charming reverie's vain deflection
 absorbed me in the recollection
 of certain ladies' tiny feet.
 Enough I've wandered in the suite
 of your slim prints! though this be treason
 to my young days, it's time I turned
 to wiser words and deeds, and learned
 to demonstrate some signs of reason:
 let no more such digressions lurk
 in this fifth chapter of my work.

 XLI

 And now, monotonously dashing
 like mindless youth, the waltz goes by
 with spinning noise and senseless flashing
 as pair by pair the dancers fly.
 Revenge's hour is near, and after
 Evgeny, full of inward laughter,
 has gone to Olga, swept the girl
 past all the assembly in a whirl,
 he takes her to a chair, beginning
 to talk of this and that, but then
 after two minutes, off again,
 they're on the dance-floor, waltzing, spinning.
 All are dumbfounded. Lensky shies
 away from trusting his own eyes.


 XLII

 Now the mazurka sounds. Its thunder
 used in times past to ring a peal
 that huge ballrooms vibrated under,
 while floors would split from crash of heel,
 and frames would shudder, windows tremble;
 now things are changed, now we resemble
 ladies who glide on waxed parquet.
 Yet the mazurka keeps today
 in country towns and suchlike places
 its pristine charm: heeltaps, and leaps,
 and whiskers - all of this it keeps
 as fresh as ever, for its graces
 are here untouched by fashion's reign,
 our modern Russia's plague and bane.

 XLIII7

 ... ...

 &lt; Petushk&oacute;v's nails and spurs are sounding
 (that half-pay archivist); and bounding
 Buy&aacute;nov's heels have split the wood
 and wrecked the flooring-boards for good;
 there's crashing, rumbling, pounding, trotting,
 the deeper in the wood, the more
 the logs; the wild ones have the floor;
 they're plunging, whirling, all but squatting.
 Ah, gently, gently, easy goes --
 your heels will squash the ladies' toes! &gt;


 XLIV

 Buy&aacute;nov, my vivacious cousin,
 leads Olga and Tatyana on
 to Eugene; nineteen to the dozen,
 Eugene takes Olga, and is gone;
 he steers her, nonchalantly gliding,
 he stoops and, tenderly confiding,
 whispers some ballad of the hour,
 squeezes her hand - and brings to flower
 on her smug face a flush of pleasure.
 Lensky has watched: his rage has blazed,
 he's lost his self-command, and crazed
 with jealousy beyond all measure
 insists, when the mazurka ends,
 on the cotillion, as amends.

 XLV

 He asks. She can't accept. Why ever?
 No, she's already pledged her word
 to Evgeny. Oh, God, she'd never...
 How could she? why, he'd never heard...
 scarce out of bibs, already fickle,
 fresh from the cot, an infant pickle,
 already studying to intrigue,
 already high in treason's league!
 He finds the shock beyond all bearing:
 so, cursing women's devious course,
 he leaves the house, calls for his horse
 and gallops. Pistols made for pairing
 and just a double charge of shot
 will in a flash decide his lot.


 Notes to Chapter Five

 1 ``See First Snow, a poem by Prince Vyazemsky.'' Pushkin's note. For Prince P. Vyazemsky (1791--1878), poet, critic and close friend of Pushkin, see also Chapter Seven, XLIX.
 2 ``See the descriptions of the Finnish winter in Baratynsky's Eda''. Pushkin's note.
 3 ``"Tomcat calls Kit" - a song foretelling marriage.'' Pushkin's note.
 4 This Russianized version of the Greek Agatho is ``elephantine and rustic to the Russian ear''. Nabokov. See note 3 to Chapter Two.
 5 Girl in Zhukovsky's poem who practises divination, with frightening results. See note 2 to Chapter Three.
 6 Slavonic god of love.
 7 Stanzas XXXVII, XXXVIII and XLIII were discarded by Pushkin.
 8 Francesco Albani, Italian painter (1578-1660).
 --------
 Chapter Six

 La, sotto giorni nubilosi e brevi.
 Nasce una gente a cui 'l morir non dole.
 Petrarch

 I

 Seeing Vladimir had defected,
 Eugene, at Olga's side, was racked
 by fresh ennui as he reflected
 with pleasure on his vengeful act.
 Olinka yawned, just like her neighbour,
 and looked for Lensky, while the labour
 of the cotillion's endless theme
 oppressed her like a heavy dream.
 It's over. Supper is proceeding.
 Beds are made up; the guests are all
 packed from the maids' wing to the hall.
 Each one by now is badly needing
 a place for rest. Eugene alone
 has driven off, to find his own.


 II

 All sleep: from the saloon a roaring
 proclaims where ponderous P&uacute;styakov
 beside his heavier half is snoring.
 Gvozd&iacute;n, Buy&aacute;nov, Petushk&oacute;v
 and Fly&aacute;nov, amply lubricated,
 on dining-chairs are all prostrated;
 the floor serves Triquet for his nap,
 in flannel, and an old fur cap.
 In the two sisters' rooms extended,
 the maidens all are slumbering deep.
 Only Tatyana does not sleep,
 but at the window, in the splendid
 radiance of Dian, sits in pain
 and looks out on the darkened plain.

 III

 His unexpected apparition,
 the fleeting tenderness that stole
 into his look, the exhibition
 with Olga, all have pierced her soul;
 she can't make out a single fraction
 of his intent; and a reaction
 of jealousy has made her start,
 as if a cold hand squeezed her heart,
 as if beneath her, dark and rumbling,
 a gulf has gaped... Says Tanya: ``I
 am doomed to perish, yet to die
 through him is sweetness' self. In grumbling
 I find no sense; the truth is this,
 it's not in him to bring me bliss.''


 IV

 But onward, onward with my story!
 A new acquaintance claims our quill.
 Five versts or so from Krasnog&oacute;rie,
 Lensky's estate, there lives and still
 thrives to this moment, in a station
 of philosophic isolation,
 Zar&eacute;tsky, sometime king of brawls
 and hetman of the gambling-halls,
 arch-rake, pothouse tribune-persona,
 but now grown plain and kind in stead,
 paterfamilias (unwed),
 unswerving friend, correct landowner,
 and even honourable man:
 so, if we want to change, we can!

 V

 The world of fashion, prone to flatter,
 praised his fierce courage in its day:
 true, with a pistol he could shatter
 an ace a dozen yards away;
 it's also true, in battle's rapture,
 the circumstances of his capture
 had made his name, when, bold as bold,
 down from his Kalmuck steed he rolled
 into the mud, a drunken goner,
 and taken by the French - some prize! --
 resigned himself to prison's ties,
 like Regulus, that god of honour,
 in order daily, chez V&eacute;ry,1
 to drain, on credit, bottles three.


 VI

 Time was, he'd been the wittiest ever,
 so brilliantly he'd hoax the fools,
 so gloriously he'd fool the clever,
 using overt or covert rules.
 Sometimes his tricks would earn him trouble,
 or cause the bursting of his bubble,
 sometimes he'd fall into a trap
 himself just like a simple chap.
 But he could draw a joking moral,
 return an answer, blunt or keen,
 use cunning silence as a screen,
 or cunningly create a quarrel,
 get two young friends to pick a fight,
 and put them on a paced-out site.

 VII

 Or he knew how to reconcile them
 so that all three went off to lunch,
 then later slyly he'd revile them
 with lies and jokes that packed a punch:
 sed alia tempora! The devil
 (like passion's dream, that other revel)
 goes out of us when youth is dead.
 So my Zaretsky, as I said,
 beneath bird-cherries and acacias
 has found a port for his old age,
 and lives, a veritable sage,
 for planting cabbage, like Horatius,
 and breeding ducks and geese as well,
 and teaching children how to spell.


 VIII

 He was no fool; appreciated
 by my Eugene, not for his heart,
 but for the effect that he created
 of sense and judgement. For his part
 his converse gave Onegin pleasure;
 so it was not in any measure,
 the morning after, a surprise
 when our Zaretsky met his eyes.
 His visitor from the beginning
 broke greetings off, and gave Eugene
 a note from Lensky; in between
 Zaretsky watched, and stood there grinning.
 Onegin without more ado
 crossed to the window, read it through.

 IX

 Pleasant, in spite of its compression,
 gentlemanly, quite precise,
 Vladimir's challenge found expression
 that, though polite, was clear as ice.
 Eugene's response was automatic;
 he informed this envoy diplomatic
 in terms where not a word was spared:
 at any time he'd be prepared.
 Zaretsky rose without discussion;
 he saw no point in staying on,
 with work at home; but when he'd gone,
 Evgeny, whom the repercussion
 left quite alone with his own soul,
 was far from happy with his role.


 X

 With reason, too: for when he'd vetted
 in secret judgement what he'd done,
 he found too much that he regretted:
 last night he'd erred in making fun,
 so heartless and so detrimental,
 of love so timorous and gentle.
 In second place the poet might
 have been a fool; yet he'd a right,
 at eighteen years, to some compassion.
 Evgeny loved him from his heart,
 and should have played a different part:
 no softball for the winds of fashion,
 no boy, to fight or take offence --
 the man of honour and of sense.

 XI

 He could have spoken without harming,
 need not have bristled like a beast;
 he should have settled for disarming
 that youthful heart. ``But now at least
 it's late, time's passing... not to mention,
 in our affair, the intervention
 of that old duellistic fox,
 that wicked, loose-tongue chatterbox...
 True, scorn should punish and should bridle
 his wit, according to the rules
 but whispers, the guffaw of fools...''
 Public opinion - here's our idol,
 the spring of honour, and the pin
 on which the world is doomed to spin.


 XII

 Lensky at home awaits the answer,
 impatient, hatred flaming high;
 but here comes our loud-talking prancer
 who swaggers in with the reply.
 The jealous poet's gloom is lightened!
 knowing the offender, he'd been frightened
 lest he should by some clever trick
 avert his chest from pistol's click,
 smoothe his way out with humour's ointment.
 But now Vladimir's doubts are still:
 early tomorrow at the mill
 before first light they have appointment,
 to raise the safety catch and strain
 to hit the target: thigh or brain.

 XIII

 Still blazing with resentment's fuel,
 and set on hating the coquette,
 Lensky resolved before the duel
 not to see Olga; in a fret
 watched sun and clock - then by such labours
 defeated, turned up at his neighbour's.
 He thought that Olga'd be confused,
 struck down as if she'd been accused,
 when he arrived; not in the slightest:
 just as she'd always been, she tripped
 to meet the unhappy poet, skipped
 down from the porch, light as the lightest,
 the giddiest hope, carefree and gay,
 the same as any other day.


 XIV

 ``Last night, what made you fly so early?''
 was the first thing that Olga said.
 All Lensky's thoughts went hurly-burly,
 and silently he hung his head.
 Rage died, and jealousy's obsession,
 before such candour of expression,
 such frank tendresse; away they stole
 before such playfulness of soul!...
 he looks, in sweet irresolution,
 and then concludes: she loves him yet!
 Already borne down by regret,
 he almost begs for absolution,
 he trembles, knows not what to tell;
 he's happy, yes, he's almost well...

 (XV, XVI,2) XVII

 Now brooding thoughts hold his attention
 once more, at that beloved sight,
 and so he lacks the strength to mention
 the happenings of the previous night;
 he murmurs: ``Olga's mine for saving;
 I'll stop that tempter from depraving
 her youth with all his repertoire
 of sighs, and compliments, and fire;
 that poisonous worm, despised, degrading,
 shall not attack my lily's root;
 I'll save this blossom on the shoot,
 still hardly opened up, from fading.''
 Friends, all this meant was: I've a date
 for swapping bullets with my mate.


 XVIII

 If only Lensky'd known the burning
 wound that had seared my Tanya's heart!
 If Tanya'd had the chance of learning
 that Lensky and Eugene, apart,
 would settle, on the morrow morning,
 for which of them the tomb was yawning,
 perhaps her love could in the end
 have reunited friend to friend!
 But, even by accident, her passion
 was undiscovered to that day.
 Onegin had no word to say;
 Tatyana pined in secret fashion:
 of the whole world, her nurse alone,
 if not slow-witted, might have known.

 XIX

 Lensky all evening, in distraction,
 would talk, keep silent, laugh, then frown --
 the quintessential reaction
 of Muses' offspring; sitting down
 before the clavichord with knitted
 forehead, he strummed, his vision flitted
 to Olga's face, he whispered low
 ``I think I'm happy.'' Time to go,
 the hour was late. And now from aching
 the heart inside him seemed to shrink;
 parting with Olga made him think
 it was quite torn in half and breaking.
 She faced him, questioning: ``But you?...''
 ``It's nothing.'' And away he flew.


 XX

 Once home, he brought out and inspected
 his pistols, laid them in their case,
 undressed, by candlelight selected
 and opened Schiller... but the embrace
 of one sole thought holds him in keeping
 and stops his doleful heart from sleeping:
 Olga is there, he sees her stand
 in untold beauty close at hand.
 Vladimir shuts the book, for writing
 prepares himself; and then his verse,
 compact of amorous trash, and worse,
 flows and reverberates. Reciting,
 he sounds, in lyric frenzy sunk,
 like Delvig3 when he's dining drunk.

 XXI

 By chance those verses haven't vanished;
 I keep them, and will quote them here:
 ``Whither, oh whither are ye banished,
 my golden days when spring was dear?
 What fate is my tomorrow brewing?
 the answer's past all human viewing,
 it's hidden deep in gloom and dust.
 No matter; fate's decree is just.
 Whether the arrow has my number,
 whether it goes careering past,
 all's well; the destined hour at last
 comes for awakening, comes for slumber;
 blessed are daytime's care and cark,
 blest is the advent of the dark!


 XXII

 ``The morning star will soon be shining,
 and soon will day's bright tune be played;
 but I perhaps will be declining
 into the tomb's mysterious shade;
 the trail the youthful poet followed
 by sluggish Lethe may be swallowed,
 and I be by the world forgot;
 but, lovely maiden, wilt thou not
 on my untimely urn be weeping,
 thinking: he loved me, and in strife
 the sad beginnings of his life
 he consecrated to my keeping?...
 Friend of my heart, be at my side,
 beloved friend, thou art my bride!''

 XXIII

 So Lensky wrote, obscurely, limply
 (in the romantic style, we say,
 though what's romantic here I simply
 fail to perceive - that's by the way).
 At last, with dawn upon him, stooping
 his weary head, and softly drooping
 over the modish word ideal,
 he dozed away; but when the real
 magic of sleep had started claiming
 its due oblivion, in the hush
 his neighbour entered at a rush
 and wakened Lensky by exclaiming:
 ``Get up: it's gone six! I'll be bound,
 Onegin's waiting on the ground.''


 XXIV

 But he's mistaken: Eugene's lying
 and sleeping sounder than a rock.
 By now the shades of night are flying,
 Vesper is met by crow of cock --
 Onegin still is slumbering deeply.
 By now the sun is climbing steeply,
 and little dancing whirls of snow
 glitter and tumble as they go,
 but Eugene hasn't moved; for certain
 slumber still floats above his head.
 At last he wakes, and stirs in bed,
 and parts the fringes of his curtain;
 he looks, and sees the hour of day --
 high time he should be on his way.

 XXV

 He rings at once, and what a scurry!
 his French valet, Guillot, is there
 with gown and slippers; tearing hurry,
 as linen's brought for him to wear.
 And while with all despatch he's dressing
 he warns his man for duty, stressing
 that with him to the trysting-place
 he has to bring the battle-case.
 By now the sledge is at the portal --
 he's racing millward like a bird.
 Arrived apace, he gives the word
 to bring across Lepage's4 mortal
 barrels, and then to drive aside
 by two small oaktrees in a ride.


 XXVI

 While Lensky'd long been meditating
 impatiently on the mill-dam,
 Zaretsky, engineer-in-waiting,
 condemned the millstones as a sham.
 Onegin comes, and makes excuses;
 but in Zaretsky he induces
 amazement: ``Where's your second gone?''
 In duels a pedantic don,
 methodical by disposition,
 a classicist, he'll not allow
 that one be shot just anyhow --
 only by rule, and strict tradition
 inherited from earlier days
 (for which he must receive due praise).

 XXVII

 Evgeny echoed him: ``My second?
 He's here - Monsieur Guillot, my friend.
 I had most surely never reckoned
 his choice could shock or might offend;
 though he's unknown, there's no suggestion
 that he's not honest past all question.''
 Zaretsky bit his lip. Eugene
 asked Lensky: ``Should we start, I mean?''
 Vladimir to this casual mention
 replies: ``We might as well.'' They walk
 behind the mill. In solemn talk,
 Zaretsky draws up a convention
 with Guillot; while pourparlers last
 the two foes stand with eyes downcast.


 XXVIII

 Foes! Is it long since from each other
 the lust for blood drew them apart?
 long since, like brother linked to brother,
 they shared their days in deed and heart,
 their table, and their hours of leisure?
 But now, in this vindictive pleasure
 hereditary foes they seem,
 and as in some appalling dream
 each coldly plans the other's slaughter...
 could they not laugh out loud, before
 their hands are dipped in scarlet gore,
 could they not give each other quarter
 and part in kindness? Just the same,
 all modish foes dread worldly shame.

 XXIX

 Pistols are out, they gleam, the hammer
 thumps as the balls are pressed inside
 faceted muzzles by the rammer;
 with a first click, the catch is tried.
 Now powder's greyish stream is slipping
 into the pan. Securely gripping,
 the jagged flint's pulled back anew.
 Guillot, behind a stump in view,
 stands in dismay and indecision.
 And now the two opponents doff
 their cloaks; Zaretsky's measured off
 thirty-two steps with great precision,
 and on their marks has made them stand;
 each grips his pistol in his hand.


 XXX

 ``Now march.'' And calmly, not yet seeking
 to aim, at steady, even pace
 the foes, cold-blooded and unspeaking,
 each took four steps across the space,
 four fateful stairs. Then, without slowing
 the level tenor of his going,
 Evgeny quietly began
 to lift his pistol up. A span
 of five more steps they went, slow-gaited,
 and Lensky, left eye closing, aimed --
 but just then Eugene's pistol flamed...
 The clock of doom had struck as fated;
 and the poet, without a sound,
 let fall his pistol on the ground.

 XXXI

 Vladimir drops, hand softly sliding
 to heart. And in his misted gaze
 is death, not pain. So gently gliding
 down slopes of mountains, when a blaze
 of sunlight makes it flash and crumble,
 a block of snow will slip and tumble.
 Onegin, drenched with sudden chill,
 darts to the boy, and looks, and still
 calls out his name... All unavailing:
 the youthful votary of rhyme
 has found an end before his time.
 The storm is over,5 dawn is paling,
 the bloom has withered on the bough;
 the altar flame's extinguished now.


 XXXII

 He lay quite still, and strange as dreaming
 was that calm brow of one who swooned.
 Shot through below the chest - and streaming
 the blood came smoking from the wound.
 A moment earlier, inspiration
 had filled this heart, and detestation
 and hope and passion; life had glowed
 and blood had bubbled as it flowed;
 but now the mansion is forsaken;
 shutters are up, and all is pale
 and still within, behind the veil
 of chalk the window-panes have taken.
 The lady of the house has fled.
 Where to, God knows. The trail is dead.

 XXXIII

 With a sharp epigram it's pleasant
 to infuriate a clumsy foe;
 and, as observer, to be present
 and watch him stubbornly bring low
 his thrusting horns, and as he passes
 blush to descry in looking-glasses
 his foolish face; more pleasant yet
 to hear him howl: ``that's me!'' You'll get
 more joy still when with mute insistence
 you help him to an honoured fate
 by calmly aiming at his pate
 from any gentlemanly distance;
 but when you've managed his despatch
 you won't find that quite so much catch...


 XXXIV

 What if your pistol-shot has smitten
 a friend of yours in his first youth
 because some glance of his has bitten
 your pride, some answer, or in truth
 some nonsense thrown up while carousing,
 or if himself, with rage arousing,
 he's called you out - say, in your soul
 what feelings would assume control
 if, motionless, no life appearing,
 death on his brow, your friend should lie,
 stiffening as the hours go by,
 before you on the ground, unhearing,
 unspeaking, too, but stretched out there
 deaf to the voice of your despair?

 XXXV

 Giving his pistol-butt a squeezing,
 Evgeny looks at Lensky, chilled
 at heart by grim remorse's freezing.
 ``Well, what?'' the neighbour says, ``he's killed.''
 Killed!... At this frightful word a-quiver,
 Onegin turns, and with a shiver
 summons his people. On the sleigh
 with care Zaretsky stows away
 the frozen corpse, drives off, and homing
 vanishes with his load of dread.
 The horses, as they sense the dead,
 have snorted, reared, and whitely foaming
 have drenched the steel bit as they go
 and flown like arrows from a bow.


 XXXVI

 My friends, the bard stirs your compassion:
 right in the flower of joyous hope,
 hope that he's had no time to fashion
 for men to see, still in the scope
 of swaddling clothes - already blighted!
 Where is the fire that once ignited,
 where's the high aim, the ardent sense
 of youth, so tender, so intense?
 and where is love's tempestuous yearning,
 where are the reveries this time,
 the horror of disgrace and crime,
 the thirst for work, the lust for learning,
 and life celestial's phantom gleams,
 stuff of the poet's hallowed dreams!

 XXXVII

 Perhaps to improve the world's condition,
 perhaps for fame, he was endowed;
 his lyre, now stilled, in its high mission
 might have resounded long and loud
 for aeons. Maybe it was fated
 that on the world's staircase there waited
 for him a lofty stair. His shade,
 after the martyr's price it paid,
 maybe bore off with it for ever
 a secret truth, and at our cost
 a life-creating voice was lost;
 to it the people's blessing never
 will reach, and past the tomb's compound
 hymns of the ages never sound.


 (XXXVIII,2) XXXIX

 Perhaps however, to be truthful,
 he would have found a normal fate.
 The years would pass; no longer youthful,
 he'd see his soul cool in its grate;
 his nature would be changed and steadied,
 he'd sack the Muses and get wedded;
 and in the country, blissful, horned,
 in quilted dressing-gown adorned,
 life's real meaning would have found him;
 at forty he'd have got the gout,
 drunk, eaten, yawned, grown weak and stout,
 at length, midst children swarming round him,
 midst crones with endless tears to shed,
 and doctors, he'd have died in bed.

 XL

 Reader, whatever fate's direction,
 we weep for the young lover's end,
 the man of reverie and reflection,
 the poet struck down by his friend!
 Left-handed from the habitation
 where dwelt this child of inspiration,
 two pines have tangled at the root;
 beneath, a brook rolls its tribute
 toward the neighbouring valley's river.
 The ploughman there delights to doze,
 girl reapers as the streamlet flows
 dip in their jugs; where shadows quiver
 darkly above the water's lilt,
 a simple monument is built.


 XLI

 Below it, when sprang rains are swishing,
 when, on the plain, green herbs are massed,
 the shepherd sings of Volga's fishing
 and plaits a piebald shoe of bast;
 and the young city-bred newcomer,
 who in the country spends her summer,
 when galloping at headlong pace
 alone across the fields of space,
 will halt her horse and, gripping tightly
 the leather rein, to learn the tale,
 lift up the gauzes of her veil,
 with a quick look perusing lightly
 the simple legend - then a haze
 of tears will cloud her tender gaze.

 XLII

 Walking her horse in introspection
 across the plain's enormous room,
 what holds her in profound reflection,
 despite herself, is Lensky's doom;
 ``Olga,'' she thinks, ``what fate befell her?
 her heartache, did it long compel her,
 or did her grief soon find repair?
 and where's her sister now? and where,
 flown from society as we know it,
 of modish belles the modish foe,
 where did that glum eccentric go,
 the one who killed the youthful poet?''
 All in good time, on each point I
 will give you a complete reply.


 XLIII

 But not today. Although I dearly
 value the hero of my tale,
 though I'll come back to him, yet clearly
 to face him now I feel too frail...
 The years incline to gloom and prosing,
 they kill the zest of rhymed composing,
 and with a sigh I now admit
 I have to drag my feet to it.
 My pen, as once, no longer hurries
 to spoil loose paper by the ream;
 another, a more chilling dream,
 and other, more exacting worries,
 in fashion's din, at still of night,
 come to disturb me and affright.

 XLIV

 I've learnt the voice of new ambition,
 I've learnt new sadness; but in this
 the first will never find fruition,
 the earlier griefs are what I miss.
 O dreams, o dreams, where is your sweetness?
 where (standard rhyme) are youth and fleetness?
 can it be true, their crown at last
 has felt time's desiccating blast?
 can it be true, and firmly stated
 without an elegiac frill,
 that spring with me has had its fill
 (as I've so oft in jest related)?
 Can it be true, it won't come twice --
 and I'll be thirty in a trice?


 XLV

 Well, I must make a frank confession,
 my noon is here, and that's the truth.
 So let me with a kind expression
 take leave of my lightheaded youth!
 Thank you for all the gifts I treasure,
 thank you for sorrow and for pleasure,
 thank you for suffering and its joys,
 for tempests and for feasts and noise;
 thank you indeed. Alike in sorrow
 and in flat calm I've found the stuff
 of perfect bliss in you. Enough!
 My soul's like crystal, and tomorrow
 I shall set out on brand-new ways
 and rest myself from earlier days.

 XLVI

 Let me look back. Farewell, umbrageous
 forests where my young age was passed
 in indolence and in rampageous
 passion and dreams of pensive cast.
 But come, thou youthful inspiration,
 come, trouble my imagination,
 liven the drowsing of my heart,
 fly to my corner like a dart,
 let not the poet's soul of passion
 grow cold, and hard, and stiff as stock,
 and finally be turned to rock
 amid the deadening joys of fashion,
 &lt; amongst the soulless men of pride,
 the fools who sparkle far and wide,6


 XLVII

 amongst the crafty and small-minded,
 the children spoilt, the mad, the rogues
 both dull and ludicrous, the bunded
 critics and their capricious vogues,
 amongst devout coquettes, appalling
 lickspittles who adore their crawling,
 and daily scenes of modish life
 where civil treacheries are rife,
 urbane betrayals, and the chilling
 verdicts of vanity the bleak,
 men's thoughts, their plots, the words they speak,
 all of an emptiness so killing - &gt;
 that's the morass, I beg you note,
 in which, dear friends, we're all afloat!


 Notes to Chapter Six

 1 Caf&eacute;-restaurant in Paris.
 2 Stanzas XV, XVI and XXXVIII were discarded by Pushkin.
 3 Anton Delvig, poet and close friend of Pushkin.
 4 Jean Lepage, Parisian gunsmith.
 5 ``A deliberate accumulation of conventional poetical formulae by means of which Pushkin mimics poor Lensky's own style... but the rich and original metaphor of the deserted house, closed inner shutters, whitened window-panes, departed female owner (the soul being feminine in Russian), with whi
 XXXII ends, is Pushkin's own contribution, a sample as it were of what he can do.'' Nabokov.
 6 These lines and the first twelve lines of stanza XLVII were discarded by Pushkin.
 --------
 Chapter Seven

 Moscow, loved daughter of Russia,
 where can we find your equal?
 Dmitriev

 ``How can one not love mother Moscow?''
 Baratynsky

 ``You criticize Moscow? why make such a fuss
 of seeing the world? what on earth could be better?''
 ``A place where you'll find none of us.''
 Griboedov

 I

 By now the rays of spring are chasing
 the snow from all surrounding hills;
 it melts, away it rushes, racing
 down to the plain in turbid rills.
 Smiling through sleep, nature is meeting
 the infant year with cheerful greeting:
 the sky is brilliant in its blue
 and, still transparent to the view,
 the downy woods are greener-tinted;
 from waxen cell the bees again
 levy their tribute on the plain;
 the vales dry out, grow brightly printed;
 cows low, in the still nights of spring
 the nightingale's begun to sing.


 II

 O spring! o time for love! how sadly
 your advent swamps me in its flood!
 and in my soul, o spring, how madly
 your presence aches, and in my blood!
 How heavy, and how near to sobbing,
 the bliss that fills me when your throbbing,
 caressing breath has fanned my face
 in rural calm's most secret place!
 Or from all notion of enjoyment
 am I estranged, does all that cheers,
 that lives, and glitters, and endears,
 now crush with sorrow's dull deployment
 a soul that perished long ago,
 and finds the world a darkling show?

 III

 Or, unconsoled by the returning
 of leaves that autumn killed for good,
 are we recalled to grief still burning
 by the new whisper in the wood?
 or else does nature, fresh and staring,
 set off our troubled mind comparing
 its newness with our faded days,
 with years no more to meet our gaze?
 Perhaps, when thoughts are all a-quiver
 in midst of a poetic dream,
 some other, older spring will gleam,
 and put our heart into a shiver
 with visions of enchanted night,
 of distant countries, of moonlight...


 IV

 It's time: kind-hearted, idle creatures,
 dons of Epicurean rule,
 calm men with beatific features,
 graduates of the Levshin1 school,
 Priam-like agricultural sages,
 sensitive ladies of all ages --
 the spring invites you to the land
 now warmth and blossom are on hand,
 field-work, and walks with inspiration,
 and magic nights. In headlong course
 come to the fields, my friends! To horse!
 With mounts from home, or postal station,
 in loaded carriages, migrate,
 leave far behind that city-gate.

 V

 Forsake, indulgent reader - driven
 in your cal&egrave;che of foreign cast --
 the untiring city, where you've given
 to feasts and fun this winter past;
 and though my muse may be capricious,
 we'll go with her to that delicious
 and nameless rivulet, that scene
 of whispering woods where my Eugene,
 an idle monk in glum seclusion,
 has lately wintered, just a space
 from young Tatyana's dwelling-place,
 dear Tanya, lover of illusion;
 though there he's no more to be found,
 he's left sad footprints on the ground.


 VI

 Amidst the hills, down in that valley,
 let's go where, winding all the time
 across green meadows, dilly-dally,
 a brook flows through a grove of lime.
 There sings the nightingale, spring's lover,
 the wild rose blooms, and in the covert
 the source's chattering voice is heard;
 and there a tombstone says its word
 where two old pinetrees stand united:
 ``This is Vladimir Lensky's grave
 who early died as die the brave'' --
 the headpiece-text is thus indited --
 the year, his age, then: ``may your rest,
 young poet, be for ever blest!''

 VII

 There was a pine-branch downward straying
 towards the simple urn beneath;
 time was when morning's breeze was swaying
 over it a mysterious wreath:
 time was, in evening hours of leisure,
 by moonlight two young girls took pleasure,
 closely embraced, in wending here,
 to see the grave, and shed a tear.
 Today... the sad memorial's lonely,
 forgot. Its trodden path is now
 choked up. There's no wreath on the bough;
 grey-haired and weak, beneath it only
 the shepherd, as he used to do,
 sings as he plaits a humble shoe.


 (VIII,2 IX,) X

 Poor Lensky! Set aside for weeping,
 or pining, Olga's hours were brief.
 Alas for him! there was no keeping
 his sweetheart faithful to her grief.
 Another had the skill to ravish
 her thoughts away, knew how to lavish
 sweet words by which her pain was banned --
 a Lancer wooed and won her hand,
 a Lancer - how she deified him!
 and at the altar, with a crown,
 her head in modesty cast down,
 already there she stands beside him;
 her eyes are lowered, but ablaze,
 and on her lips a light smile plays.

 XI

 Poor Lensky! where the tomb is bounded
 by dull eternity's purlieus,
 was the sad poet not confounded
 at this betrayal's fateful news?
 Or, as by Lethe's bank he slumbered,
 perhaps no more sensations lumbered
 the lucky bard, and as he dozed
 the earth for him grew dumb and closed?...
 On such indifference, such forgetting
 beyond the grave we all must build --
 foes, friends and loves, their voice is stilled.
 Only the estate provides a setting
 for angry heirs, as one, to fall
 into an unbecoming brawl.


 XII

 Presently Olga's ringing answer
 inside the Larins' house fell mute.
 Back to his regiment the Lancer,
 slave of the service, was en route.
 Weltered in tears, and sorely smarting,
 the old dame wept her daughter's parting,
 and in her grief seemed fit to die;
 but Tanya found she couldn't cry:
 only the pallor of heart-breaking
 covered her face. When all came out
 onto the porch, and fussed about
 over the business of leave-taking,
 Tatyana went with them, and sped
 the carriage of the newly-wed.

 XIII

 And long, as if through mists that spurted,
 Tanya pursued them with her gaze...
 So there she stood, forlorn, deserted!
 The comrade of so many days,
 oh! her young dove, the natural hearer
 of secrets, like a friend but dearer,
 had been for ever borne off far
 and parted from her by their star.
 Shade-like, in purposeless obsession
 she roams the empty garden-plot...
 in everything she sees there's not
 a grain of gladness; tears' repression
 allows no comfort to come through --
 Tatyana's heart is rent in two.


 XIV

 Her passion burns with stronger powder
 now she's bereft, and just the same
 her heart speaks to her even louder
 of far-away Onegin's name.
 She'll not see him, her obligation
 must be to hold in detestation
 the man who laid her brother low.
 The poet's dead... already though
 no one recalls him or his verses;
 by now his bride-to-be has wed
 another, and his memory's fled
 as smoke in azure sky disperses.
 Two hearts there are perhaps that keep
 a tear for him... but what's to weep?

 XV

 Evening, and darkening sky, and waters
 in quiet flood. A beetle whirred.
 The choirs of dancers sought their quarters.
 Beyond the stream there smoked and stirred
 a fisher's fire. Through country gleaming
 silver with moonlight, in her dreaming
 profoundly sunk, Tatyana stalked
 for hours alone; she walked and walked...
 Suddenly, from a crest, she sighted
 a house, a village, and a wood
 below a hill; a garden stood
 above a stream the moon had lighted.
 She looked across, felt in her heart
 a faster, stronger pulsing start.


 XVI

 She hesitates, and doubts beset her:
 forward or back? it's true that he
 has left, and no one here has met her...
 ``The house, the park... I'll go and see!''
 So down came Tanya, hardly daring
 to draw a breath, around her staring
 with puzzled and confused regard...
 She entered the deserted yard.
 Dogs, howling, rushed in her direction...
 Her frightened cry brought running out
 the household boys in noisy rout;
 giving the lady their protection,
 by dint of cuff and kick and smack
 they managed to disperse the pack.

 XVII

 ``Could I just see the house, I wonder?''
 Tatyana asked. The children all
 rushed to Anisia's room, to plunder
 the keys that opened up the hall.
 At once Anisia came to greet her,
 the doorway opened wide to meet her,
 she went inside the empty shell
 in which our hero used to dwell.
 She looks: forgotten past all chalking
 on billiard-table rests a cue,
 and on the crumpled sofa too
 a riding whip. Tanya keeps walking...
 ``And here's the hearth,'' explains the crone,
 ``where master used to sit alone.


 XVIII

 ``Here in the winter he'd have dinner
 with neighbour Lensky, the deceased.
 Please follow me. And here's the inner
 study where he would sleep and feast
 on cups of coffee, and then later
 he'd listen to the administrator;
 in morning time he'd read a book...
 And just here, in the window-nook,
 is where old master took up station,
 and put his glasses on to see
 his Sunday game of cards with me.
 I pray God grant his soul salvation,
 and rest his dear bones in the tomb,
 down in our damp earth-mother's womb!''

 XIX

 Tatyana in a deep emotion
 gazes at all the scene around;
 she drinks it like a priceless potion;
 it stirs her drooping soul to bound
 in fashion that's half-glad, half-anguished:
 that table where the lamp has languished,
 beside the window-sill, that bed
 on which a carpet has been spread,
 piled books, and through the pane the sable
 moonscape, the half-light overall,
 Lord Byron's portrait on the wall,
 the iron figure3 on the table,
 the hat, the scowling brow, the chest
 where folded arms are tightly pressed.


 XX

 Longtime inside this modish cloister,
 as if spellbound, Tatyana stands.
 It's late. A breeze begins to roister,
 the valley's dark. The forest lands
 round the dim river sleep; the curtain
 of hills has hid the moon; for certain
 the time to go has long since passed
 for the young pilgrim. So at last
 Tatyana, hiding her condition,
 and not without a sigh, perforce
 sets out upon her homeward course;
 before she goes, she seeks permission
 to come back to the hall alone
 and read the books there on her own.

 XXI

 Outside the gate Tatyana parted
 with old Anisia. The next day
 at earliest morning out she started,
 to the empty homestead made her way,
 then in the study's quiet setting,
 at last alone, and quite forgetting
 the world and all its works, she wept
 and sat there as the minutes crept;
 the books then underwent inspection...
 at first she had no heart to range;
 but then she found their choice was strange.
 To reading from this odd collection
 Tatyana turned with thirsting soul:
 and watched a different world unroll.


 XXII

 Though long since Eugene's disapproval
 had ruled out reading, in their place
 and still exempted from removal
 a few books had escaped disgrace:
 Don Juan's and the Giaour's creator,
 two or three novels where our later
 epoch's portrayed, survived the ban,
 works where contemporary man
 is represented rather truly,
 that soul without a moral tie,
 all egoistical and dry,
 to dreaming given up unduly,
 and that embittered mind which boils
 in empty deeds and futile toils.

 XXIII

 There many pages keep the impression
 where a sharp nail has made a dent.
 On these, with something like obsession,
 the girl's attentive eyes are bent.
 Tatyana sees with trepidation
 what kind of thought, what observation,
 had drawn Eugene's especial heed
 and where he'd silently agreed.
 Her eyes along the margin flitting
 pursue his pencil. Everywhere
 Onegin's soul encountered there
 declares itself in ways unwitting --
 terse words or crosses in the book,
 or else a query's wondering hook.


 XXIV

 And so, at last, feature by feature,
 Tanya begins to understand
 more thoroughly, thank God, the creature
 for whom her passion has been planned
 by fate's decree: this freakish stranger,
 who walks with sorrow, and with danger,
 whether from heaven or from hell,
 this angel, this proud devil, tell,
 what is he? Just an apparition,
 a shadow, null and meaningless,
 a Muscovite in Harold's dress,
 a modish second-hand edition,
 a glossary of smart argot...
 a parodistic raree-show?

 XXV

 Can she have found the enigma's setting?
 is this the riddle's missing clue?
 Time races, and she's been forgetting
 her journey home is overdue.
 Some neighbours there have come together;
 they talk of her, of how and whether:
 ``Tanya's no child - it's past a joke,''
 says the old lady in a croak:
 ``why, Olga's younger, and she's bedded.
 It's time she went. But what can I
 do with her when a flat reply
 always comes back: I'll not be wedded.
 And then she broods and mopes for good,
 and trails alone around the wood.''


 XXVI

 ``She's not in love?'' ``There's no one, ever.
 Buy&aacute;nov tried - got flea in ear.
 And Ivan Petushk&oacute;v; no, never.
 Pikht&iacute;n, of the Hussars, was here;
 he found Tatyana so attractive,
 bestirred himself, was devilish active!
 I thought, she'll go this time, perhaps;
 far from it! just one more collapse.''
 ``You don't see what to do? that's funny:
 Moscow's the place, the marriage-fair!
 There's vacancies in plenty there.''
 ``My dear good sir, I'm short of money.''
 ``One winter's worth, you've surely got;
 or borrow, say, from me, if not.''

 XXVII

 The old dame had no thought of scouring
 such good and sensible advice;
 accounts were done, a winter outing
 to Moscow settled in a trice.
 Then Tanya hears of the decision.
 To face society's derision
 with the unmistakeable sideview
 of a provincial ing&eacute;nue,
 to expose to Moscow fops and Circes
 her out-of-fashion turns of phrase,
 parade before their mocking gaze
 her out-of-fashion clothes!... oh, mercies!
 no, forests are the sole retreat
 where her security's complete.


 XXVIII

 Risen with earliest rays of dawning,
 Tanya today goes hurrying out
 into the fields, surveys the morning,
 with deep emotion looks about
 and says: ``Farewell, you vales and fountains!
 farewell you too, familiar mountains!
 Farewell, familiar woods! Farewell,
 beauty with all its heavenly spell,
 gay nature and its sparkling distance!
 This dear, still world I must forswear
 for vanity, and din, and glare!...
 Farewell to you, my free existence!
 whither does all my yearning tend?
 my fate, it leads me to what end?''

 XXIX

 She wanders on without direction.
 Often she halts against her will,
 arrested by the sheer perfection
 she finds in river and in hill.
 As with old friends, she craves diversion
 in gossip's rambling and discursion
 with her own forests and her meads...
 But the swift summer-time proceeds --
 now golden autumn's just arriving.
 Now Nature's tremulous, pale effect
 suggests a victim richly decked...
 The north wind blows, the clouds are driving --
 amidst the howling and the blast
 sorceress-winter's here at last.


 XXX

 She's here, she spreads abroad; she stipples
 the branches of the oak with flock;
 lies in a coverlet that ripples
 across the fields, round hill and rock;
 the bank, the immobile stream are levelled
 beneath a shroud that's all dishevelled;
 frost gleams. We watch with gleeful thanks
 old mother winter at her pranks.
 Only from Tanya's heart, no cheering --
 for her, no joy from winter-time,
 she won't inhale the powdered rime,
 nor from the bath-house roof be clearing
 first snow for shoulders, breast and head:
 for Tanya, winter's ways are dread.

 XXXI

 Departure date's long overtaken;
 at last the final hours arrive.
 A sledded coach, for years forsaken,
 relined and strengthened for the drive;
 three carts - traditional procession --
 with every sort of home possession:
 pans, mattresses, and trunks, and chairs,
 and jam in jars, and household wares,
 and feather-beds, and birds in cages,
 with pots and basins out of mind,
 and useful goods of every kind.
 There's din of parting now that rages,
 with tears, in quarters of the maids:
 and, in the yard, stand eighteen jades.


 XXXII

 Horses and coach are spliced in marriage;
 the cooks prepare the midday meal;
 mountains are piled on every carriage,
 and coachmen swear, and women squeal.
 The bearded outrider is sitting
 his spindly, shaggy nag. As fitting,
 to wave farewell the household waits
 for the two ladies at the gates.
 They're settled in; and crawling, sliding,
 the grand barouche is on its way.
 ``Farewell, you realms that own the sway
 of solitude, and peace abiding!
 shall I see you?'' As Tanya speaks
 the tears in stream pour down her cheeks.

 XXXIII

 When progress and amelioration
 have pushed their frontiers further out,
 in time (to quote the calculation
 of philosophic brains, about
 five hundred years) for sure our byways
 will blossom into splendid highways:
 paved roads will traverse Russia's length
 bringing her unity and strength;
 and iron bridges will go arching
 over the waters in a sweep;
 mountains will part; below the deep,
 audacious tunnels will be marching:
 Godfearing folk will institute
 an inn at each stage of the route.


 XXXIV

 But now our roads are bad, the ages
 have gnawed our bridges, and the flea
 and bedbug that infest the stages
 allow no rest to you or me;
 inns don't exist; but in a freezing
 log cabin a pretentious-teasing
 menu, hung up for show, excites
 all sorts of hopeless appetites;
 meanwhile the local Cyclops, aiming
 a Russian hammer-blow, repairs
 Europe's most finely chiselled wares
 before a fire too slowly flaming,
 and blesses the unrivalled brand
 of ruts that grace our fatherland.

 XXXV

 By contrast, in the frozen season,
 how pleasantly the stages pass.
 Like modish rhymes that lack all reason,
 the winter's ways are smooth as glass.
 Then our Automedons are flashing,
 our troikas effortlessly dashing,
 and mileposts grip the idle sense
 by flickering past us like a fence.
 Worse luck, Larina crawled; the employment
 of her own horses, not the post,
 spared her the expense she dreaded most --
 and gave our heroine enjoyment
 of traveller's tedium at its peak:
 their journey took them a full week.


 XXXVI

 But now they're near. Already gleaming
 before their eyes they see unfold
 the towers of whitestone Moscow beaming
 with fire from every cross of gold.
 Friends, how my heart would leap with pleasure
 when suddenly I saw this treasure
 of spires and belfries, in a cup
 with parks and mansions, open up.
 How often would I fall to musing
 of Moscow in the mournful days
 of absence on my wandering ways!
 Moscow... how many strains are fusing
 in that one sound, for Russian hearts!
 what store of riches it imparts!

 XXXVII

 Here stands, with shady park surrounded,
 Petrovsky Castle; and the fame
 in which so lately it abounded
 rings proudly in that sombre name.
 Napoleon here, intoxicated
 with recent fortune, vainly waited
 till Moscow, meekly on its knees,
 gave up the ancient Kremlin-keys:
 but no, my Moscow never stumbled
 nor crawled in suppliant attire.
 No feast, no welcome-gifts - with fire
 the impatient conqueror was humbled!
 From here, deep-sunk in pensive woe,
 he gazed out on the threatening glow.


 XXXVIII

 Farewell, Petrovsky Castle, glimmer
 of fallen glory. Well! don't wait,
 drive on! And now we see a-shimmer
 the pillars of the turnpike-gate;
 along Tverskaya Street already
 the potholes make the coach unsteady.
 Street lamps go flashing by, and stalls,
 boys, country women, stately halls,
 parks, monasteries, towers and ledges,
 Bokharans, orchards, merchants, shacks,
 boulevards, chemists, and Cossacks,
 peasants, and fashion-shops, and sledges,
 lions adorning gateway posts
 and, on the crosses, jackdaw hosts.

 (XXXIX,2) XL

 This wearisome perambulation
 takes up an hour or two; at last
 the coach has reached its destination;
 after Saint Chariton's gone past
 a mansion stands just round a turning.
 On an old aunt, who's long been burning
 with a consumption, they've relied.
 And now the door is opened wide,
 a grizzled Calmuck stands to meet them,
 bespectacled, in tattered dress;
 and from the salon the princess,
 stretched on a sofa, calls to greet them.
 The two old ladies kiss and cry;
 thickly the exclamations fly.


 XLI

 ``Princess, mon ange!'' ``Pachette!'' ``Alina!''
 ``Who would have thought it?'' ``What an age!''
 ``How long can you... ?'' ``Dearest kuzina!''
 ``Sit down! how strange! it's like the stage
 or else a novel.'' ``And my daughter
 Tatyana's here, you know I've brought her...''
 ``Ah, Tanya, come to me, it seems
 I'm wandering in a world of dreams...
 Grandison, cousin, d'you remember?''
 ``What, Grandison? oh, Grandison!
 I do, I do. Well, where's he gone?''
 ``Here, near Saint Simeon; in December,
 on Christmas Eve, he wished me joy:
 lately he married off his boy.''

 XLII

 ``As for the other one... tomorrow
 we'll talk, and talk, and then we'll show
 Tanya to all her kin. My sorrow
 is that my feet lack strength to go
 outside the house. But you'll be aching
 after your drive, it's quite back-breaking;
 let's go together, take a rest...
 Oh, I've no strength... I'm tired, my chest...
 These days I'm finding even gladness,
 not only pain, too much to meet...
 I'm good for nothing now, my sweet...
 you age, and life's just grief and sadness...''
 With that, in tears, and quite worn out,
 she burst into a coughing-bout.


 XLIII

 The invalid's glad salutation,
 her kindness, move Tatyana; yet
 the strangeness of her habitation,
 after her own room, makes her fret.
 No sleep, beneath that silken curtain,
 in that new couch, no sleep for certain;
 the early pealing of the bells
 lifts her from bed as it foretells
 the occupations of the morning.
 She sits down by the window-sill.
 The darkness thins away; but still
 no vision of her fields is dawning.
 An unknown yard, she sees from thence,
 a stall, a kitchen and a fence.

 XLIV

 The kinsfolk in concerted action
 ask Tanya out to dine, and they
 present her languor and distraction
 to fresh grandparents every day.
 For cousins from afar, on meeting
 there never fails a kindly greeting,
 and exclamations, and good cheer.
 ``How Tanya's grown! I pulled your ear
 just yesterday.'' ``And since your christening
 how long is it?'' ``And since I fed
 you in my arms on gingerbread?''
 And all grandmothers who are listening
 in unison repeat the cry:
 ``My goodness, how the years do fly!''


 XLV

 Their look, though, shows no change upon it --
 they all still keep their old impress:
 still made of tulle, the self-same bonnet
 adorns Aunt Helen, the princess;
 still powdered is Luk&eacute;rya Lvovna,
 a liar still, Lyub&oacute;v Petrovna,
 Iv&aacute;n Petr&oacute;vich still is dumb,
 Semy&oacute;n Petr&oacute;vich, mean and glum,
 and then old cousin Pelag&eacute;ya
 still has Monsieur Finemouche for friend,
 same Pom, same husband to the end;
 he's at the club, a real stayer,
 still meek, still deaf as howd'youdo,
 still eats and drinks enough for two.

 XLVI

 And in their daughters' close embraces
 Tanya is gripped. No comment's made
 at first by Moscow's youthful graces
 while she's from top to toe surveyed;
 they find her somewhat unexpected,
 a bit provincial and affected,
 too pale, too thin, but on the whole
 not bad at all; and then each soul
 gives way to nature's normal passion:
 she's their great friend, asked in, caressed,
 her hands affectionately pressed;
 they fluff her curls out in the fashion,
 and in a singsong voice confide
 the inmost thoughts that girls can hide.


 XLVII

 Each others' and their own successes,
 their hopes, their pranks, their dreams at night --
 and so the harmless chat progresses
 coated with a thin layer of spite.
 Then in return for all this twaddle,
 from her they strive to coax and coddle
 a full confession of the heart.
 Tatyana hears but takes no part;
 as if she'd been profoundly sleeping,
 there's not a word she's understood;
 she guards, in silence and for good,
 her sacred store of bliss and weeping
 as something not to be declared,
 a treasure never to be shared.

 XLVIII

 To talk, to general conversation
 Tatyana seeks to attune her ear,
 but the salon's preoccupation
 is with dull trash that can't cohere:
 everything's dim and unenthusing;
 even the scandal's not amusing;
 in talk, so fruitless and so stale,
 in question, gossip, news and tale,
 not once a day a thought will quiver,
 not even by chance, once in a while,
 will the benighted reason smile,
 even in joke the heart won't shiver.
 This world's so vacuous that it's got
 no spark of fun in all its rot!


 XLIX

 In swarms around Tatyana ranging,
 the modish Record Office clerks
 stare hard at her before exchanging
 some disagreeable remarks.
 One melancholy fop, declaring
 that she's ``ideal'', begins preparing
 an elegy to her address,
 propped in the door among the press.
 Once Vy&aacute;zemsky,4 who chanced to find her
 at some dull aunt's, sat down and knew
 how to engage in talk that drew
 her soul's attention; just behind her
 an old man saw her as she came,
 straightened his wig, and asked her name.

 L

 But where, mid tragic storms that rend her,
 Melpomene wails long and loud,
 and brandishes her tinsel splendour
 before a cold, indifferent crowd,
 and where Thalia, gently napping,
 ignores approval's friendly clapping,
 and where Terpsichore alone
 moves the young watcher (as was known
 to happen long ago, dear readers,
 in our first ages), from no place
 did any glasses seek her face,
 lorgnettes of jealous fashion-leaders,
 or quizzing-glasses of know-alls
 in boxes or the rows of stalls.


 LI

 They take her too to the Assembly.
 The crush, the heat, as music blares,
 the blaze of candles, and the trembly
 flicker of swiftly twirling pairs,
 the beauties in their flimsy dresses,
 the swarm, the glittering mob that presses,
 the ring of marriageable girls --
 bludgeon the sense; it faints and whirls.
 Here insolent prize-dandies wither
 all others with a waistcoat's set
 and an insouciant lorgnette.
 Hussars on leave are racing hither
 to boom, to flash across the sky,
 to captivate, and then to fly.

 LII

 The night has many stars that glitter,
 Moscow has beauties and to spare:
 but brighter than the heavenly litter,
 the moon in its azure of air.
 And yet that goddess whom I'd never
 importune with my lyre, whenever
 like a majestic moon, she drives
 among the maidens and the wives,
 how proudly, how divinely gleaming,
 she treads our earth, and how her breast
 is in voluptuous languor dressed,
 how sensuously her eyes are dreaming!
 Enough, I tell you, that will do --
 you've paid insanity its due.


 LIII

 Noise, laughter, bowing, helter-skelter
 galop, mazurka, waltz... Meanwhile
 between two aunts, in pillared shelter,
 unnoticed, in unseeing style,
 Tanya looks on; her own indictment
 condemns the monde and its excitement;
 she finds it stifling here... she strains
 in dream toward the woods and plains,
 the country cottages and hovels,
 and to that far and lonely nook
 where flows a little glittering brook,
 to her flower-garden, to her novels, --
 to where he came to her that time
 in twilight of all&eacute;es of lime.

 LIV

 But while she roams in thought, not caring
 for dance, and din, and worldly ways,
 a general of majestic bearing
 has fixed on her a steady gaze.
 The aunts exchanged a look, they fluttered,
 they nudged Tatyana, and each muttered
 at the same moment in her ear:
 ``Look quickly to the left, d'you hear?''
 ``Look to the left? where? what's the matter?''
 ``There, just in front of all that swarm,
 you see the two in uniform...
 just look, and never mind the chatter...
 he's moved... you see him from the side.''
 ``Who? that fat general?'' Tanya cried.


 LV

 But here, with our congratulation
 on her conquest, we leave my sweet;
 I'm altering my destination
 lest in forgetfulness complete
 I drop my hero... I'll be truthful:
 ``It is a friend I sing, a youthful
 amateur of caprice and quirk.
 Muse of the epic, bless my work!
 in my long task, be my upholder,
 put a strong staff into my hand,
 don't let me stray in paths unplanned.''
 Enough. The load is off my shoulder!
 I've paid my due to classic art:
 it may be late, but it's a start.


 Notes to Chapter Seven

 1 Vasily Levshin (1746-1826), writer on gardening and agriculture.
 2 Stanzas VIII and IX and XXXIX were discarded by Pushkin.
 3 A statuette of Napoleon.
 4 See note 1 to Chapter Five.
 --------
 Chapter Eight

 Fare thee well, and if for ever,
 Still for ever, fare thee well.
 Byron

 Days when I came to flower serenely
 in Lyc&eacute;e gardens long ago,
 and read my Apuleius keenly,
 but spared no glance for Cicero;
 yes, in that spring-time, in low-lying
 secluded vales, where swans were crying,
 by waters that were still and clear,
 for the first time the Muse came near.
 And suddenly her radiance lighted
 my student cell: she opened up
 the joys of youth, that festal cup,
 she sang of childhood's fun, indited
 Russia's old glories and their gleams,
 the heart and all its fragile dreams.


 II

 And with a smile the world caressed us:
 what wings our first successes gave!
 aged Derzh&aacute;vin1 saw and blessed us
 as he descended to the grave.
 ... ...

 III

 The arbitrary rules of passion
 were all the law that I would use;
 sharing her in promiscuous fashion,
 I introduced my saucy Muse
 to roar of banquets, din of brawling,
 when night patrol's a perilous calling;
 to each and every raving feast
 she brought her talents, never ceased,
 Bacchante-like, her flighty prancing;
 sang for the guests above the wine;
 the youth of those past days in line
 behind her followed wildly dancing;
 among my friends, in all that crowd
 my giddy mistress made me proud.


 IV

 When I defected from their union
 and ran far off... the Muse came too.
 How often, with her sweet communion,
 she'd cheer my wordless way, and do
 her secret work of magic suasion!
 How often on the steep Caucasian
 ranges, Lenora2-like, she'd ride
 breakneck by moonlight at my side!
 How oft she'd lead me, by the Tauric
 seacoast, to hear in dark of night
 the murmuring Nereids recite,
 and the deep-throated billows' choric
 hymnal as, endlessly unfurled,
 they praise the Father of the world.

 V

 But then, oblivious of the city,
 its glaring feasts, and shrill events,
 in far Moldavia, fit for pity,
 she visited the humble tents
 of wandering tribesmen; while the ravage
 of their society turned her savage,
 she lost the language of the gods
 for the bleak tongue of boorish clods --
 she loved the steppe-land and its singing,
 then quickly something changed all this:
 look here, as a provincial miss
 she's turned up in my garden, bringing
 sad meditations in her look,
 and, in her hand, a small French book.


 VI

 Now for the first time she's escorted
 into the social whirlabout;
 jealously, shyly, I've imported
 her steppeland charms into a rout.3
 Through the tight ranks - aristocratic,
 military-foppish, diplomatic --
 past the grand ladies, see her glide;
 she sits down calmly on one side,
 admires the tumult and the pressing,
 the flickering tones of dress and speech,
 the young hostess, towards whom each
 new guest is gradually progressing,
 while men, all sombre, all the same,
 set off the ladies like a frame.

 VII

 She enjoys the stately orchestration
 of oligarchical converse,
 pride's icy calm, the combination
 of ranks and ages so diverse.
 But who stands there, in this selected
 assembly, silent and dejected?
 All who behold him find him strange.
 Faces before him flash and change
 like irksome phantoms, null as zero.
 Is spleen his trouble, or the dumb
 torment of pride? And why's he come?
 Who on earth is he? not... our hero?
 No doubt about it, it's Eugene.
 ``How long has he been on the scene?


 VIII

 Still as he was? has he stopped prancing?
 does he still pose, and play the freak?
 Now he's returned, what role's he dancing?
 what play will he present this week?
 For what charade is he apparelled?
 Is he a Melmoth, a Childe Harold,
 a patriot, a cosmopolite,
 bigot or prude? or has he quite
 a different mask? is he becoming
 someone like you and me, just nice?
 At least I'll give him some advice:
 to drop all that old-fashioned mumming;
 too long he's hoaxed us high and low...''
 ``You know him, do you?'' ``Yes and no.''

 IX

 However has he earned so vicious,
 so unforgiving a report?
 Is it that we've become officious
 and prone to censure in our thought;
 that fiery souls' headstrong enthusing
 appears offensive or amusing
 to the complacent and the null;
 that wit embarrasses the dull;
 that we enjoy equating chatter
 with deeds; that dunces now and then
 take wing on spite; that serious men
 find, in the trivial, serious matter;
 that mediocre dress alone
 fits us as if it were our own?


 X

 Blest he who in his youth was truly
 youthful, who ripened in his time,
 and, as the years went by, who duly
 grew hardened to life's frosty clime;
 who never learnt how dreamers babble;
 who never scorned the social rabble;
 at twenty, was a fop inbred,
 at thirty, lucratively wed;
 at fifty, would prolong the story
 by clearing every sort of debt;
 who, in good time, would calmly get
 fortune, and dignity, and glory,
 who all his life would garner praise
 as the perfection of our days!

 XI

 Alas, our youth was what we made it,
 something to fritter and to burn,
 when hourly we ourselves betrayed it,
 and it deceived us in return;
 when our sublimest aspiration,
 and all our fresh imagination,
 swiftly decayed beyond recall
 like foliage in the rotting fall.
 It's agony to watch the hollow
 sequence of dinners stretch away,
 to see life as a ritual play,
 and with the decorous throng to follow
 although one in no manner shares
 its views, its passions, or its cares!


 XII

 To be a butt for the malicious
 is agony, if I may speak,
 and in the eyes of the judicious
 to pass for an affected freak,
 or for a lamentable manic,
 a monster of the gens Satanic,
 or for that Demon4 of my dream.
 Onegin - now once more my theme --
 had killed his best friend in a duel;
 without a goal on which to fix,
 lived to the age of twenty-six;
 was finding leisure's vacuum cruel;
 and with no post, no work, no wife,
 had nothing to employ his life.

 XIII

 He was the slave of a tenacious,
 a restless urge for change of place
 (an attribute that's quite vexatious,
 though some support it with good grace).
 He's gone away and left his village,
 the solitude of woods and tillage,
 where every day a bloodstained shade
 had come to him in field and glade;
 started a life of pointless roaming,
 dogged by one feeling, only one --
 and soon his travels had begun,
 as all things did, to bore him; homing,
 like Chatsky,5 he arrived to fall
 direct from shipboard into ball.


 XIV

 There came a murmur, for a fleeting
 moment the assembly seemed to shake...
 that lady the hostess was greeting,
 with the grand general in her wake --
 she was unhurried, unobtrusive,
 not cold, but also not effusive,
 no haughty stare around the press,
 no proud pretentions to success,
 no mannerism, no affectation,
 no artifices of the vain...
 No, all in her was calm and plain.
 She struck one as the incarnation --
 Shishkov,6 forgive me: I don't know
 the Russian for le comme il faut.

 XV

 Ladies came over, crossed to meet her,
 dowagers smiled as she went by;
 and bending deeply down to greet her
 men made their bows, and sought her eye;
 girls as they passed her spoke less loudly,
 and no one in the room so proudly
 raised nose and shoulders high and wide
 as did the general at her side.
 You'd never class her as a beauty;
 and yet in her you'd not detect --
 rigorously though you'd inspect --
 what London calls, with humble duty
 to fashion's absolute dictate,
 a vulgar touch. I can't translate.


 XVI

 And yet, although it's past conveying,
 I really dote upon the word:
 it's new to us, beyond gainsaying;
 from the first moment it was heard
 it had its epigram-potential7...
 But let's return to our essential,
 that lady whose engaging charm
 so effortlessly can disarm.
 She sits with Nina8 at a table --
 bright Northern Cleopatra she:
 but you'll undoubtedly agree
 that marble Nina's proved unable
 to steal away her neighbour's light
 or dim her, dazzle as she might.

 XVII

 ``Can it be she?'' Eugene in wonder
 demanded. ``Yes, she looks... And yet...
 from deepest backwood, furthest under...''
 And every minute his lorgnette
 stays fixed and focused on a vision
 which has recalled, without precision,
 forgotten features. ``Can you say,
 prince, who in that dark-red b&eacute;ret,
 just there, is talking to the Spanish
 ambassador?'' In some surprise
 the prince looks at him, and replies:
 ``Wait, I'll present you - but you banish
 yourself too long from social life.''
 ``But tell me who she is.'' ``My wife.''


 XVIII

 ``You're married? No idea whatever...
 Since when is this?'' ``Two years or more.''
 ``To...?'' ``Larina.'' ``Tatyana? never!''
 ``She knows you?'' ``Why, we lived next door.''
 So to his wife for presentation
 the prince bring up his own relation
 and friend Evgeny. The princess
 gazes at him... and nonetheless,
 however much her soul has faltered,
 however strongly she has been
 moved and surprised, she stays serene,
 and nothing in her look is altered:
 her manner is no less contained;
 her bow, as calm and as restrained.

 XIX

 I don't mean that she never shivered,
 paled, flushed, or lost composure's grip --
 no, even her eyebrow never quivered,
 she never even bit her lip.
 However closely he inspected,
 there was no trace to be detected
 of the old Tatyana. Eugene tried
 to talk to her, but language died.
 How long he'd been here, was her query,
 and where had he arrived from, not
 from their own country? Then she shot
 across to her consort a weary
 regard, and slipped away for good, ...
 with Eugene frozen where he stood.


 XX

 Was she the Tanya he'd exhorted
 in solitude, as at the start
 of this our novel we reported,
 in the far backwoods' deepest heart,
 to whom, in a fine flow of preaching,
 he had conveyed some moral teaching,
 from whom he'd kept a letter, where
 her heart had spoken, free as air,
 untouched by trace of inhibition,
 could it be she... or had he dreamed?
 the girl he'd scorned in what he deemed
 the modesty of her condition,
 could it be she, who just had turned
 away, so cool, so unconcerned?

 XXI

 Eugene forsakes the packed reception,
 and home he drives, deep-sunk in thought.
 By dreams now sad in their conception,
 now sweet, his slumbers are distraught.
 He wakes - and who is this who writes him?
 Prince N. respectfully invites him
 to a soir&eacute;e. ``My God! to her!...
 I'll go, I'll go!'' - and in a stir
 a swift, polite reply is written.
 What ails him? he's in some strange daze!
 what moves along the hidden ways
 in one so slothful, so hard-bitten?
 vexation? vainness? heavens above,
 it can't be youth's distemper - love?


 XXII

 Once more he counts the hour-bells tolling,
 once more he can't await the night;
 now ten has struck, his wheels are rolling,
 he drives there like a bird in flight,
 he's up the steps, with heart a-quiver
 led to the princess, all a-shiver,
 finds her alone, and there they sit
 some minutes long. The words won't fit
 on Eugene's lips. In his dejection,
 his awkwardness, he's hardly said
 a single thing to her. His head
 is lost in obstinate reflection;
 and obstinate his look. But she
 sits imperturbable, and free.

 XXIII

 Her husband enters, thus concluding
 their unattractive t&ecirc;te-&agrave;-t&ecirc;te;
 he and Onegin start alluding
 to pranks and jokes of earlier date.
 They laugh. The guests begin arriving.
 Already now the talk was thriving
 on modish malice, coarse of grain
 but salt; near the princess a vein
 of unaffectedly fantastic
 invention sparkled, then gave way
 to reasoned talk, no dull hearsay,
 no deathless truths, nothing scholastic;
 and no one's ear could take offence
 at such vivacious, free good sense.


 XXIV

 High rank, of course, and fashion's glasses,
 Saint Petersburg's fine flower was there --
 the inevitable silly asses,
 the faces met with everywhere;
 ladies of riper years, delicious
 in rose-trimmed bonnets, but malicious;
 a girl or two, without a smile
 to crack between them; for a while
 one listened to a chief of mission
 on state affairs; there was a wit,
 a grey-haired, perfumed exquisite,
 a joker in the old tradition,
 acute and subtle - in a word
 all that today we find absurd.

 XXV

 There, with epigrammatic neatness,
 was one who raged and raged again,
 against the tea's excessive sweetness,
 the boring wives, the ill-bred men,
 a novel, vague and superficial,
 two sisters who'd received the initial,9
 the lies that in the press run rife,
 the war, the snowfall, and his wife.
 ... ...


 XXVI

 There was - --,10 so notorious
 through baseness of the soul that he,
 in albums, blunted the censorious
 cartoonist-pencils of Saint-Priest;11
 another of the ball-dictators,
 a fashion-plate for illustrators,
 stood in the door, cherubic, mute,
 frozen in his tight-fitting suit;
 a far-flung traveller who was creaking
 with foppery and too much starch,
 set the guests smiling at his arch,
 affected pose - and an unspeaking
 unanimous exchange of looks
 entered his sentence in the books.

 XXVII

 But my Eugene that night directed
 his gaze at Tatyana alone --
 not the plain, timorous, dejected
 and lovelorn maiden whom he'd known,
 but the unbending goddess-daughter
 of Neva's proud imperial water,
 the imperturbable princess.
 We all resemble more or less
 our Mother Eve: we're never falling
 for what's been given us to take;
 to his mysterious tree the snake
 is calling us, for ever calling --
 and once forbidden fruit is seen,
 no paradise can stay serene.


 XXVIII

 In Tanya, what a transformation!
 how well she'd studied her new role!
 how soon the bounds of rank and station
 had won her loyalty! What soul
 would have divined the tender, shrinking
 maiden in this superb, unthinking
 lawgiver to the modish world?
 Yet once for him her thoughts had whirled,
 for him, at night, before the indulgence
 of Morpheus had induced relief
 she once had pined in girlish grief,
 raised a dull eye to moon's refulgence,
 and dreamt that she with him one day
 jointly would tread life's humble way!

 XXIX

 Love tyrannises all the ages;
 but youthful, virgin hearts derive
 a blessing from its blasts and rages,
 like fields in spring when storms arrive.
 In passion's sluicing rain they freshen,
 ripen, and find a new expression --
 the vital force gives them the shoot
 of sumptuous flowers and luscious fruit.
 But when a later age has found us,
 the climacteric of our life,
 how sad the scar of passion's knife:
 as when chill autumn rains surround us,
 throw meadows into muddy rout,
 and strip the forest round about.


 XXX

 Alas, Eugene beyond all query
 is deep in love, just like a boy;
 spends light and darkness in the dreary
 brooding that is the lover's ploy.
 Each day, despite the appeals of reason,
 he drives up in and out of season
 to her glass porch; pursues her round
 close as a shadow on the ground;
 and bliss for him is when he hotly
 touches her hand, or throws a fur
 around her neck, or when for her
 he goes ahead and parts the motley
 brigade of liveries in the hall,
 or else lifts up a fallen shawl.

 XXXI

 But she refuses to perceive him,
 even if he drops or pines away.
 At home she'll equably receive him,
 in others' houses she may say
 a word or two, or stare unseeing,
 or simply bow: within her being
 coquettishness has got no trace --
 the grand monde finds it out of place.
 Meanwhile Onegin starts to languish:
 she doesn't see, or doesn't mind;
 Onegin wastes, you'd almost find
 he's got consumption. In his anguish
 some vote a doctor for the case,
 others prescribe a watering-place.


 XXXII

 But go he won't: for him, a letter
 fixing an early rendezvous
 with his forefathers would seem better;
 but she (for women, that's not new)
 remains unmoved: still he's persistent,
 active, and hopeful, and insistent:
 his illness lends him courage and
 to the princess, in his weak hand,
 he sends a letter, penned with passion.
 He deemed, in general, letters vain,
 and rightly so, but now his pain
 had gone in no uncertain fashion
 past all endurance. You're referred
 to Eugene's letter, word for word.


 Onegin's Letter to Tatyana

 ``I know it all: my secret ache
 will anger you in its confession.
 What scorn I see in the expression
 that your proud glance is sure to take!
 What do I want? what am I after,
 stripping my soul before your eyes!
 I know to what malicious laughter
 my declaration may give rise!

 ``I noticed once, at our chance meeting,
 in you a tender pulse was beating,
 yet dared not trust what I could see.
 I gave no rein to sweet affection:
 what held me was my predilection,
 my tedious taste for feeling free.
 And then, to part us in full measure,
 Lensky, that tragic victim, died...
 From all sweet things that gave me pleasure,
 since then my heart was wrenched aside;
 freedom and peace, in substitution
 for happiness, I sought, and ranged
 unloved, and friendless, and estranged.
 What folly! and what retribution!

 ``No, every minute of my days,
 to see you, faithfully to follow,
 watch for your smile, and catch your gaze
 with eyes of love, with greed to swallow
 your words, and in my soul to explore
 your matchlessness, to seek to capture
 its image, then to swoon before
 your feet, to pale and waste... what rapture!


 ``But I'm denied this: all for you
 I drag my footsteps hither, yonder;
 I count each hour the whole day through;
 and yet in vain ennui I squander
 the days that doom has measured out.
 And how they weigh! I know about
 my span, that fortune's jurisdiction
 has fixed; but for my heart to beat
 I must wake up with the conviction
 that somehow that same day we'll meet...

 ``I dread your stern regard surmising
 in my petition an approach,
 a calculation past despising --
 I hear the wrath of your reproach.
 How fearful, in and out of season
 to pine away from passion's thirst,
 to burn - and then by force of reason
 to stem the bloodstream's wild outburst;
 how fearful, too, is my obsession
 to clasp your knees, and at your feet
 to sob out prayer, complaint, confession,
 and every plea that lips can treat;
 meanwhile with a dissembler's duty
 to cool my glances and my tongue,
 to talk as if with heart unwrung,
 and look serenely on your beauty!...

 ``But so it is: I'm in no state
 to battle further with my passion;
 I'm yours, in a predestined fashion,
 and I surrender to my fate.''


 XXXIII

 No answer comes. Another letter
 he sends, a second, then a third.
 No answer comes. He goes, for better
 or worse, to a soir&eacute;e. Unheard
 she appears before him, grim and frozen.
 No look, no word for him: she's chosen
 to encase herself inside a layer
 of Twelfth Night's chillest, iciest air.
 To batten down their indignation
 is all those stubborn lips desire!
 Onegin looks with eyes of fire:
 where are distress, commiseration?
 No tearstains, nothing. Wrath alone
 is graven on that face of stone.

 XXXIV

 Perhaps some secret apprehension
 lest signs of casual weakness drew
 her husband's or the world's attention...
 Ah, all that my Onegin knew...
 No hope! no hope! He leaves the revel,
 wishes his madness to the devil,
 drives home - and plunging deeper in,
 once more renounces world and din.
 And he remembers, in the quiet
 of his own room, how cruel spleen
 had once before, across the scene
 of social buzz and modish riot,
 tracked him, and put him in duress,
 and locked him in a dark recess.


 XXXV

 Once more he turned to books, unchoosing,
 devouring Gibbon and Rousseau,
 Manzoni and Chamfort,12 perusing
 Madame de Sta&euml;l, Bichat,13 Tissot,14
 Herder, and even at times a Russian --
 nothing was barred beyond discussion --
 he read of course the sceptic Bayle15
 and all the works of Fontanelle16 --
 almanacs, journals of reflection,
 where admonitions are pronounced,
 where nowadays I'm soundly trounced,
 but where such hymns in my direction
 were chanted, I remember when --
 e sempre bene, gentlemen.

 XXXVI

 What happened? Though his eyes were reading,
 his thoughts were on a distant goal:
 desires and dreams and griefs were breeding
 and swarming in his inmost soul.
 Between the lines of text as printed,
 his mind's eye focused on the hinted
 purport of other lines; intense
 was his absorption in their sense.
 Legends, and mystical traditions,
 drawn from a dim, warm-hearted past,
 dreams of inconsequential cast,
 rumours and threats and premonitions,
 long, lively tales from wonderland,
 or letters in a young girl's hand.


 XXXVII

 Then gradually upon sensation,
 and thought, a sleepy numbness steals;
 before his eyes, imagination
 brings out its faro pack, and deals.
 He sees: in slush, stretched out and keeping
 motionless as one soundly sleeping
 in bed, a young man, stiff and chilled;
 he hears a voice; ``well, what? he's killed!''
 And foes he sees, long-since forgotten,
 a rogue, a slanderer, a poltroon,
 young traitresses by the platoon,
 comrades despised, and comrades rotten;
 a country house - and one who still
 sits there beside the window-sill!

 XXXVIII

 He got so used to this immersion,
 he almost lost his mind, expired,
 or joined us poets. His conversion
 would have been all that we required!
 It's true, the magnet-like attraction
 of Russian verse, its force in action, --
 my inept pupil, at that hour,
 so nearly had them in his power.
 Who could have looked the poet better,
 as in the nook he'd sit alone
 by blazing fireplace, and intone
 Idol mio or Benedetta,
 and on the flames let fall unseen
 a slipper, or a magazine?

 XXXIX

 The days flew past; by now the season
 in warmer airs was half dispersed.
 He's neither died, nor lost his reason,
 nor turned a poet. In the burst
 of spring he lives, he's energetic;
 he leaves one morning the hermetic
 apartment where a double glaze
 has kept him warm in chimney's blaze
 while, marmot-like, he hibernated --
 along the Neva in a sleigh,
 past ice-blocks, blue and squared away,
 he drives in brilliant sun; striated
 along the street lies dirty snow;
 and like an arrow from a bow

 XL

 over the slush, where is he chasing?
 You've guessed before it all began:
 to his Tatyana, yes, he's racing,
 my strange, incorrigible man.
 He goes inside, corpse-like of feature...
 the hall's without a living creature,
 the big room, further, not a cat.
 He opens up a door. What's that
 that strikes him with such force and meaning?
 The princess, sitting peaked and wan,
 alone, with no adornment on;
 she holds a letter up, and leaning
 cheek upon hand she softly cries
 in a still stream that never dries.

 XLI

 Who in that flash could not have reckoned
 her full account of voiceless pain?
 Who in the princess for that second
 would not have recognized again
 our hapless Tanya! An emotion
 of wild repentance and devotion
 threw Eugene at her feet - she stirred,
 and looked at him without a word,
 without surprise or rage... his laden,
 his humbly suppliant approach,
 his dull, sick look, his dumb reproach --
 she sees it all. The simple maiden,
 whose heart on dreams was wont to thrive,
 in her once more has come alive.

 XLII

 Tatyana leaves Onegin kneeling,
 looks at him with a steady gaze,
 allows her hand, that's lost all feeling,
 to meet his thirsty lips... What daze,
 what dream accounts for her distraction?
 A pause of silence and inaction,
 then quietly at last says she:
 ``Enough, stand up. It's now for me
 to give you honest explanation.
 Onegin, d'you recall the day
 when in the park, in the all&eacute;e
 where fate had fixed our confrontation,
 humbly I heard your lesson out?
 Today it's turn and turn about.

 XLIII

 ``For then, Onegin, I was younger,
 and also prettier, I'll be bound,
 what's more, I loved you; but my hunger,
 what was it in your heart it found
 that could sustain it? Only grimness;
 for you, I think, the humble dimness
 of lovelorn girls was nothing new?
 But now - oh God! - the thought of you,
 your icy look, your stern dissuasion,
 freezes my blood... Yet all the same,
 nothing you did gave cause for blame:
 you acted well, that dread occasion,
 you took an honourable part --
 I'm grateful now with all my heart.

 XLIV

 ``Then, in the backwoods, far from rumour
 and empty gossip, you'll allow,
 I'd nothing to attract your humour...
 Why then do you pursue me now?
 What cause has won me your attention?
 Could it not be that by convention
 I move in the grand monde? that rank,
 and riches, and the wish to thank
 my husband for his wounds in battle
 earn us the favour of the Court?
 that, for all this, my shame's report
 would cause widespread remark and tattle,
 and so in the salons could make
 a tempting plume for you to take?

 XLV

 ``I weep... In case there still should linger
 your Tanya's image in your mind,
 then know that your reproving finger,
 your cold discourse, were less unkind --
 if I had power to choose your fashion --
 than this humiliating passion
 and than these letters, and these tears.
 At least you then showed for my years
 respect, and mercy for my dreaming.
 But now! what brings you to my feet?
 What trifling could be more complete?
 What power enslaves you, with your seeming
 advantages of heart and brain,
 to all that's trivial and inane?

 XLVI

 ``To me, Onegin, all this glory
 is tinsel on a life I hate;
 this modish whirl, this social story,
 my house, my evenings, all that state --
 what's in them? All this loud parading,
 and all this flashy masquerading,
 the glare, the fumes in which I live,
 this very day I'd gladly give,
 give for a bookshelf, a neglected
 garden, a modest home, the place
 of our first meeting face to face,
 and the churchyard where, new-erected,
 a humble cross, in woodland gloom,
 stands over my poor nurse's tomb.

 XLVII

 ``Bliss was so near, so altogether
 attainable!... But now my lot
 is firmly cast. I don't know whether
 I acted thoughtlessly or not:
 you see, with tears and incantation
 mother implored me; my sad station
 made all fates look the same... and so
 I married. I beseech you, go;
 I know your heart: it has a feeling
 for honour, a straightforward pride.
 I love you (what's the use to hide
 behind deceit or double-dealing?)
 but I've become another's wife --
 and I'll be true to him, for life.''

 XLVIII

 She went - and Eugene, all emotion,
 stood thunder-struck. In what wild round
 of tempests, in what raging ocean
 his heart was plunged! A sudden sound,
 the clink of rowels, met his hearing;
 Tatyana's husband, now appearing...
 But from the hero of my tale,
 just at this crisis of his gale,
 reader, we must be separating,
 for long... for evermore. We've chased
 him far enough through wild and waste.
 Hurrah! let's start congratulating
 ourselves on our landfall. It's true,
 our vessel's long been overdue.

 XLIX

 Reader, I wish that, as we parted --
 whoever you may be, a friend,
 a foe - our mood should be warm-hearted.
 Goodbye, for now we make an end.
 Whatever in this rough confection
 you sought - tumultuous recollection,
 a rest from toil and all its aches,
 or just grammatical mistakes,
 a vivid brush, a witty rattle --
 God grant that from this little book
 for heart's delight, or fun, you took,
 for dreams, or journalistic battle,
 God grant you took at least a grain.
 On this we'll part; goodbye again!

 L

 And my companion, so mysterious,
 goodbye to you, my true ideal,
 my task, so vivid and so serious
 and yet so light. All that is real
 and enviable for a poet,
 in your pursuit I've come to know it:
 oblivion of life's stormy ways,
 sweet talk with friends. How many days
 since, through the mist that dreams arise on,
 young Tanya first appeared to me,
 Onegin too - and there to see,
 a free romance's far horizon,
 still dim, through crystal's magic glass,
 before my gaze began to pass.


 LI

 Of those who heard my opening pages
 in friendly gatherings where I read,
 as Sadi17 sang in earlier ages,
 ``some are far distant, some are dead''.
 They've missed Eugene's completed etching.
 But she who modelled for the sketching
 of Tanya's image... Ah, how great
 the toll of those borne off by fate!
 Blest he who's left the hurly-burly
 of life's repast betimes, nor sought
 to drain its beaker down, nor thought
 of finishing its book, but early
 has wished it an abrupt goodbye --
 and, with my Eugene, so have I.

